Thi s epigraph is chosen quite deliberately. I run the risk of its
seeming to lend itself to a certain Christian, idealist, and humanist
tone, a tone in which it is easy to recognize those well-meaning
virtues and values that have loosed upon the world all the things
that have driven the humanit y of our century to despair over itself,
where these values are both blind to and complicit in this letting
loose. In his own way, Nietzsche himself woul d have undoubtedly
participated in this dubious, moralizing piety. At any rate, the word
"meaning" rarely appears in his work, and still more rarely in any
positive sense. On e would do well, therefore, not to give any hasty
interpretations of it here. The above excerpt appeals to a "human
meaning, " but it does so by affirming that the human [l'homme]
remains to be discovered. 1
 In order for the human to be discovered,
and in order for the phrase "huma n meaning" to acquire some
meaning, everything that has ever laid claim to the truth about the
nature, essence, or end of "man" must be undone. In other words,
nothing must remain of what, under the title of meaning, related
the earth [la terre] and the human to a specifiable horizon. Again, it
is Nietzsche who said that we are now "on the horizon of the infinite";
that is, we are at that point where "there is no more 'land,' "
and where "there is nothing more terrible than the infinite." 2
A r e we finally going to learn this lesson? Ar e we perhaps finally
able to hear it, or is it now impossible for us to learn anything 

else? Ca n we think an earth and a human such that they woul d be
onl y what they are—nothing but earth and human—an d such
that they woul d be none of the various horizons often harbored
under these names, none of the "perspectives" or "views" in view
of which we have disfigured humans [les hommes] and driven them
to despair?
"Th e horizon of the infinite" is no longer the horizon of the
whole, but the "whole" (all that is) as put on hol d everywhere,
pushed to the outside just as much as it is pushed back inside the
"self." It is no longer a line that is drawn, or a line that wil l be
drawn, which orients or gathers the meaning of a course of progress
or navigation. It is the opening [la breche] or distancing [lecartement]
of horizon itself, and in the opening: us. We happen as the
opening itself, the dangerous fault line of a rupture.
I want to emphasize the date on which I am writing this. It is
the summe r of 1995, and as far as specifying the situation of the
earth and humans is concerned, nothing is more pressing (how
could it really be avoided?) than a list of proper names such as
these, presented here in no particular order: Bosnia-Herzogovina,
Chechnya , Rwanda , Bosnian Serbs, Tutsis, Hutus , Tami l Tigers,
Krajina Serbs, Casamance, Chiapas, Islamic Jihad, Bangladesh, the
Secret Arm y for the Liberation of Armenia , Hamas , Kazakhstan,
Khmer s Rouges, ET A militia, Kurds (UPK/PDK) , Montataire, the
Movement for Self-determination, Somalia, Chicanos , Shiites,
FNLC-Cana l Historique , Liberia , Giva t Hagadan, Nigeria , the
League of the North , Afghanistan, Indonesia, Sikhs, Haiti , Rom a
gypsies of Slovenia, Taiwan, Burma , PLO , Iraq, Islamic Front Salvation,
Shining Path, Vaulx-en-Velins , Neuhof. . . . Of course, it
would be difficult to bring this list to an end if the aim was to in -
clude all the places, groups, or authorities that constitute the theater
of bloody conflicts among identities, as well as what is at stake
in these conflicts. These days it is not always possible to say with
any assurance whether these identities are intranational, infranational,
or transnational; whether they are "cultural, " "religious,"
"ethnic," or "historical" ; whether they are legitimate or not—no t
to mention the question about which law would provide such legitimation;
whether they are real, mythical, or imaginary; whether
they are independent or "instrumentalized" by other groups who
wield political, economic, and ideological power. . . .
Thi s is the "earth" we are supposed to "inhabit " today, the earth
for which the name Sarajevo wil l become the martyr-name, the
testimonial-name: this is us, we who are supposed to say we as if
we know what we are saying and who we are talking about. Thi s
earth is anything but a sharing of humanity. It is a world that does
not even manage to constitute a world; it is a world lacking in
world, and lacking in the meaning of world. It is an enumeration
that brings to light the sheer number and proliferation of these various
poles of attraction and repulsion. It is an endless list, and
everything happens in such a way that one is reduced to keeping
accounts but never taking the final toll. It is a litany, a prayer of
pure sorrow and pure loss, the plea that falls from the lips of millions
of refugees every day: whether they be deportees, people besieged,
those who are mutilated, people who starve, who are raped,
ostracized, excluded, exiled, expelled.
Wha t I am talking about here is compassion, but not compassion
as a pity that feels sorry for itself and feeds on itself. Com-passion
is the contagion, the contact of being with one another in this turmoil.
Compassion is not altruism, nor is it identification; it is the
disturbance of violent relatedness.
Wha t does the above-named proliferation require of us, this proliferation
that seems to have no other meaning than the indeterminate
multiplication of centripetal meanings, meanings closed in on
themselves and supersaturated with significance—that is, meanings
that are no longer meaningful because they have come to refer only
to their own closure, to their horizon of appropriation, and have
begun to spread nothing but destruction, hatred, and the denial of
existence?
Wha t if this autistic multiplicity, which tears open and is torn 
XIV
open, lets us know that we have not even begun to discover what it
is to be many, even though "la terre des hommes" 3
 is exactly this?
Wha t if it lets us know that it is itself the first laying bare [mise à
nu] of a world that is onl y the world, but which is the world absolutely
and unreservedly, with no meaning beyond this very Being
of the world: singularly plural and plurally singular?
Preface
T he first and principal essay of this book, which gives it its title,
was not composed in an altogether sequential manner, but rather
in a discontinuous way, repeatedly taking up several themes. To a
certain extent, then, the sections can be read in any order, since
there are repetitions here and there. But this is the result of a fundamental
difficulty. Thi s text does not disguise its ambition of redoing
the whole of "first philosophy" by giving the "singular
plural " of Being1
 as its foundation. This , however, is not my ambition,
but rather the necessity of the thing itself and of our history.
At the very least, I hope to make this necessity felt. At the same
time, apart from the fact that I do not have the strength to deliver
the treatise "of the singular plural essence of Being, " the form of
the ontological treatise ceases to be appropriate as soon as the singular
of Being itself, and therefore also of ontology, is in question.
Thi s is nothing new. At least since Nietzsche, and for all sorts of
reasons that no doubt come together in the reason I invoke, philosophy
is at odds with its "form, " that is, with its "style," which is
to say, finally, with its address. Ho w does thinking address itself to
itself, to thinking (which also means: how does thinking address
itself to everyone, without its being a matter of a "comprehension"
or "understanding" that might be called "common")? Ho w is
thinking addressed? (The philosophical treatise, and "philosophy"
as such, is the neutralization of address, the subjectless discourse of 
X V I Preface
Being-Subject [l'Etre-Sujet] itself.) Put another way, what is the "dialogue
of the soul with itself" that Plato talks about, which demonstrates
that this question, or this worry, has always been part of our
history? If thinking is addressed, then it is because there is meaning
in this address, and not in discourse (but it is in the address of discourse).
Thi s obeys the primordial, ontological condition of beingwith
or being-together, which is what I would like to talk about. A
treatise, therefore, is not sufficiently discursive. No r is it enough to
dress discourse in the form of an address (for me to address you
with the familiar "you" [tu] the whole way through). Th e address
means that thinking itself addresses itself to "me" and to "us" at the
same time; that is, thinking addresses itself to the world, to history,
to people, to things: to "us." Anothe r ambition springs from this
or, better yet, another, more restricted, attempt: to allow thinking's
address to be perceived, an address that comes to us from everywhere
simultaneously, multiplied, repeated, insistent, and variable,
gesturing onl y toward "us" and toward our curious "being-withone-another,"
[être-les-uns-avec-les-autres], toward our addressingone-another.
2
(By the way, the logic of "with" often requires heavy-handed syntax
in order to say "being-with-one-another." You may suffer from
it as you read these pages. But perhaps it is not an accident that
language does not easily lend itself to showing the "with" as such,
for it is itself the address and not what must be addressed.)
In this, there is an illusion that lies in wait, the illusion of willing
the adequation of "form" and "content," of willing truth itself into
presence: as if I could write to every addressee a seismographical
account of our upsets, our agitations, our troubles, and our addresses
without addressees. My only response i s no: no will , "on
my life I did not know what it was to will " (Nietzsche). Or I might
say the following: willing (or desire) is not a thinking ; it is a disturbance,
an echo, a reverberating shock.
T h e latter essays were chosen because their subjects converge
with that of the primary essay. As you will see, the first two are connected
to the exact circumstances of the most violent events of
these last years. 
§ Of Being Singular Plural
It i s goo d to rely upo n others . Fo r no one can bear thi s life alone .
—Hôlderli n
Sinc e huma n natur e i s the true communit y o f men , those wh o
produc e thereby affirm thei r nature , huma n community , an d social
bein g which , rather tha n an abstract, general powe r in oppositio n
t o the isolated individual , i s the bein g o f each individual , his ow n
activity, hi s ow n life, hi s ow n joy, his ow n richness . To say that a
m a n i s alienated fro m himsel f i s to say that the society of this
alienated ma n i s the caricatur e of his real community .
—Mar x
We Are Meaning
It is often said today that we have lost meaning, that we lack it
and, as a result, are in need of and waiting for it. Th e "one" who
speaks in this way forgets that the very propagation of this discourse
is itself meaningful. Regretting the absence of meaning itself has
meaning. But such regret does not have meaning only in this negative
mode; denying the presence of meaning affirms that one knows
what meaning would be, were it there, and keeps the mastery and
truth of meaning in place (which is the pretension of the humanist
discourses that propose to "rediscover" meaning.) Whethe r it is
aware of it or not, the contemporary discourse on meaning goes
much further and in a completely different direction: it brings to
light the fact that "meaning," used in this absolute way, has become
the bared [dénudé] name of our being-with-one-another. We do not
"have" meaning anymore, because we ourselves are meaning—en -
tirely, without reserve, infinitely, with no meaning other than "us."
Thi s does not mean that we are the content of meaning, nor are
we its fulfillment or its result, as if to say that humans were the
meaning (end, substance, or value) of Being, nature, or history. The
meaning of this meaning—tha t is, the signification to which a state
of affairs corresponds and compares—i s precisely what we say we 
2 Being Singular Plural
have lost. But we are meaning in the sense that we are the element
in which significations can be produced and circulate. The least signification
just as muc h as the most elevated (the meaning of "nail "
as well as the meaning of "God" ) has no meaning in itself and, as a
result, is what it is and does what it does only insofar as it is communicated,
even where this communication takes place onl y between
"me" and "myself." Meanin g is its own communication or
its own circulation. Th e "meaning of Being" is not some property
that wil l come to qualify, fill in , or finalize the brute givenness of
"Being " pure and simple.' Instead, it is the fact that there is no
"brute givenness" of Being, that there is no desperately poor there
is presented when one says that "there is a nail catching. ... " But
the givenness of Being, the givenness inherent to the very fact that
we understand something when we say "to be" (whatever it may
be and however confused it might be), along wit h the (same)
givenness that is given with this fact—cosubstantial with the givenness
of Being and the understanding of Being, that we understand
one another (however confusedly) when we say it, is a gift that can
be summarized as follows: Being itself is given to us as meaning. Bei
ng does not have meaning. Being itself, the phenomenon of Being,
is meaning that is, in turn, its ow n circulation—an d we are
this circulation.
There is no meaning if meaning is not shared, 2
 and not because
there would be an ultimate or first signification that all beings have
in common, but because meaning is itselfthe sharing of Being. Meaning
begins where presence is not pure presence but where presence
comes apart [se disjoint] in order to be itself as such. Thi s "as" presupposes
the distancing, spacing, and division of presence. Onl y the
concept of "presence" contains the necessity of this division. Pure
unshared presence—presence to nothing, of nothing, for nothing —
is neither present nor absent. It is the simple implosion of a being
that could never have been—an implosion without any trace.
Thi s is why what is called "the creation of the world" is not the
production of a pure something from nothing—whic h would not,
at the same time, implode into the nothing out of which it could
never have come—bu t is the explosion of presence in the original
Being Singular Plural 3
multiplicit y of its division. It is the explosion of nothing, in fact,
it is the spacing of meaning, spacing as meaning and circulation.
T he nihil of creation is the truth of meaning, but meaning is the
originary sharing of this truth. It could be expressed in the followi
ng way: Being cannot be anything but being-with-one-another,
circulating in the with and as the with of this singularly plural
coexistence.
If one can put it like this, there is no other meaning than the
meaning of circulation. But this circulation goes in all directions
at once, in all the directions of all the space-times [les espace-temps]
opened by presence to presence: all things, all beings, all entities,
everything past and future, alive, dead, inanimate, stones, plants,
nails, gods—an d "humans, " that is, those who expose sharing and
circulation as such by saying "we," by saying we to themselves in all
possible senses of that expression, and by saying we for the totality
of all being.
(Let us say we for all being, that is, for every being, for all beings
one by one, each time in the singular of their essential plural. Language
speaks for all and of all: for all, in their place, in their name,
including those who may not have a name. Language says what there
is of the world, nature, history and humanity, and it also speaks for
them as well as in view of them, in order to lead the one who speaks,
the one through whom language comes to be and happens ("man"), to
all of being, which does not speak but which is nevertheless—stone,
fish, fiber, dough, crack, block, and breath. The speaker speaks for
the world, which means the speaker speaks to it, on behalf of it, in order
to make it a "world. "As such, the speaker is "in its place" and "according
to its measure"; the speaker occurs as its representative but also,
at the same time (and this has all the values of pro in Latin), in anticipation
of it, before it, exposed to it as to its own most intimate consideration.
Language says the world; that is, it loses itself in it and exposes
how "in itself" it is a question of losing oneself in order to be of it,
with it, to be its meaning—which is all meaning) 
4 Being Singular Plural
Circulation goes in all directions: this is the Nietzschean thought
of the "eternal return," the affirmation of meaning as the repetition
of the instant, nothing but this repetition, and as a result, nothing
(since it is a matter of the repetition of what essentially does not
return). But it is a repetition already comprised in the affirmation
of the instant, in this affirmation/request {re-petitid) seized in the
letting go of the instant, affirming the passing of presence and itself
passing with it, affirmation abandoned in its very movement. It is
an impossible thought, a thinking that does not hold itself back
from the circulation it thinks , a thinkin g of meaning right at [à
même]3
 meaning, where its eternity occurs as the truth of its passing.
(For instance, at the moment at which I am writing, a brownand-white
cat is crossing the garden, slipping mockingly away, taki
ng my thoughts with it.)
It is in this way that the thinking of the eternal return is the in -
augural thought of our contemporary history, a thinking we must
repeat (even if it means calling it something else). We must reappropriate
what already made us who "we" are today, here and now,
the "we" of a world who no longer struggle to have meaning but to
be meaning itself. Thi s is we as the beginning and end of the world,
inexhaustible in the circumscription that nothing circumscribes,
that "the" nothing circumscribes. We make sense [nous faisons sens],
not by setting a price or value, but by exposing the absolute value
that the world is by itself. "World " does not mean anything other
than this "nothing" that no one can "mean" [vouloir dire], but that
is said in every saying: in other words, Being itself as the absolute
value in itself of all that is, but this absolute value as the being-with of
all that is itself bare and impossible to evaluate. It is neither meaning
[vouloir-dire] nor the giving of value [dire-valoir], but value as
such, that is, "meaning" which is the meaning of Being only because
it is Being itself, its existence, its truth. Existence is with: otherwise
nothing exists.
Circulation—o r eternity—goes in all directions, but it moves
only insofar as it goes from one point to another; spacing is its absolute
condition. Fro m place to place, and from moment to mo -
ment, without any progression or linear path, bit by bit and case by
Being Singular Plural 5
case, essentially accidental, it is singular and plural in its very principle.
It does not have a final fulfillment any more than it has a
point of origin. It is the originary plurality of origins and the creation
of the world in each singularity, creation continued in the discontinuity
of its discrete occurrences. From now on, we, we others4
are charged with this truth—it is more ours than ever—the truth of
this paradoxical "first-person plural" which makes sense of the world
as the spacing and intertwining of so many worlds (earths, skies,
histories) that there is a taking place of meaning, or the crossingthrough
[passages] of presence. "We " says (and "we say") the unique
event whose uniqueness and unity consist in multiplicity.
People Are Strange
Everything, then, passes between us.'' Thi s "between," as its name
implies, has neither a consistency nor continuity of its own. It does
not lead from one to the other; it constitutes no connective tissue,
no cement, no bridge. Perhaps it is not even fair to speak of a "connection"
to its subject; it is neither connected nor unconnected; it
falls short of both; even better, it is that which is at the heart of a
connection, the interlacing [Yemrecroisment] of strands whose extremities
remain separate even at the very center of the knot. Th e
"between" is the stretching out [distension] and distance opened by
the singular as such, as its spacing of meaning. Tha t which does
not maintain its distance from the "between" is only immanence
collapsed in on itself and deprived of meaning.
From one singular to another, there is contiguity but not continuity.
There is proximity, but only to the extent that extreme closeness
emphasizes the distancing it opens up. Al l of being is in touch
with all of being, but the law of touching is separation; moreover,
it is the heterogeneity of surfaces that touch each other. Contact is
beyond fullness and emptiness, beyond connection and disconnection.
If "to come into contact" is to begin to make sense of one
another, then this "coming " penetrates nothing; there is no intermediate
and mediating "milieu. " Meaning is not a milieu in which
we are immersed. There is no mi-lieu [between place]. It is a mat-
6 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 7
ter of one or the other, one and the other, one with the other, but
by no means the one in the other, which would be something other
than one or the other (another essence, another nature, a diffuse or
infuse generality). Fro m one to the other is the syncopated repetition
of origins-of-the-world, which are each time one or the other.
T h e origin is affirmation; repetition is the condition of affirmation.
I say "that is, that it is." It is not a "fact" and has nothing to
do with any sort of evaluation. It is a singularity taking refuge in
its affirmation of Being, a touch of meaning. It is not an other Being;
it is the singular of Being by which the being is, or it is of Being,
which is being in a transitive sense of the verb (an unheard of,
inaudible sense—the very meaning of Being). The touch of meani
ng brings into play [engager] its ow n singularity, its distinction,
and brings into play the plurality of the "each time" of every touch
of meaning, "mine" as well as all the others, each one of which is
"mine " in turn, according to the singular turn of its affirmation.
Right away, then, there is the repetition of the touches of meaning,
which meaning demands. Thi s incommensurable, absolutely
heterogeneous repetition opens up an irreducible strangeness of
each one of these touches to the other. The other origin is incomparable
or inassimilable, not because it is simpl y "other" but because
it is an origin and touch of meaning. Or rather, the alterity of
the other is its originary contiguity with the "proper" origin. 6
 You
are absolutely strange because the world begins its turn with you.
We say "people are strange." 7
 Thi s phrase is one of our most constant
and rudimentary ontological attestations. In fact, it says a
great deal. "People" indicates everyone else, designated as the in -
determinate ensemble of populations , lineages, or races [gentes]
from which the speaker removes himself. (Nevertheless, he removes
himself in a very particular sort of way, because the designation
is so general—and this is exactly the point—tha t it in -
evitably turns back around on the speaker. Since I say that "people
are strange," I include myself in a certain way in this strangeness.)
T h e word "people" does not say exactly the same thing as the
Heideggerian 8
 "one," 9
 even if it is partly a mode of it. Wit h the
word "one," it is not always certain whether or not the speaker in -
cludes himself in the anonymity of the "one." For example, I can
say "someone said to me" ["on m'a dit"] or else "it is said that" ["on
dit que"] or else "that is how it is done" ["c'est comme ça qu'on
fait"] or else "one is born; one dies" ["on naît, on meurt"]. These
uses are not equivalent and, moreover, it is not certain that it is always
the case that the "one" speaks of himself (from and about
himself). Heidegger understood that "one" would only be said as a
response to the question "who?" put to the subject of Dasein, but
he does not pose the other inevitable question that must be asked
in order to discover who gives this response and who, in responding
like this, removes himself or has a tendency to remove himself.
As a result, he risks neglecting the fact that there is no pure and
simple "one," no "one" in which "properly existing" existence [l'existant
"proprement existant"] is, from the start, purely and simply
immersed. "People" clearly designates the mode of "one" by which
" I " remove myself, to the point of appearing to forget or neglect
the fact that I myself am part of "people." In any case, this setting
apart [mise à l'écart] does not occur without the recognition of
identity. "People" clearly states that we are all precisely people, that
is, indistinctly persons, humans , all of a commo n "kind, " but of a
kind that has its existence only as numerous, dispersed, and indeterminate
in its generality. Thi s existence can only be grasped in
the paradoxical simultaneity of togetherness (anonymous, confused,
and indeed massive) and disseminated singularity (these or
those "people(s)," or "a guy," "a girl, " "a kid").
"People" are silhouettes that are both imprecise and singularized,
faint outlines of voices, patterns of comportment, sketches
of affects, not the anonymous chatter of the "public domain. " But
what is an affect, if not each time a sketch? A comportment, if not
each time a pattern? A voice, if not each time a faint outline? Wha t
is a singularity, if not each time its "own" clearing, its "own" im -
minence, the imminenc e of a "propriety" or propriety itself as im -
minence, always touched upon, always lightly touched: revealing
itself beside, always beside. ("Beside himself " ["a côté de ses pom -
pes" 1 0 ], as the saying goes. Th e comedy of this expression is no accident,
and, whether it masks an anxiety or liberates the laughter 
8 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 9
of the ignorant, it is always a matter of an escape, an evasion, and
an emptying out of what is closest, an oddity presented as the rule
itself.)
" I " take refuge in an exception or distinction when I say "people,"
but I also confer this distinction on each and every person,
although in just as obscure a way. Thi s is undoubtedly why people
so often make the judgment "people are strange" or "people are in -
credible." It is not only, or even primarily, a question of the tendency
(however evident) to set up our own habitus as the norm. It
is necessary to uncover a more primitiv e level of this particular
judgment, one where what is apprehended is nothing other than
singularity as such. From faces to voices, gestures, attitudes, dress,
a nd conduct, whatever the "typical " traits are, everyone distinguishes
himself by a sort of sudden and headlong precipitation
where the strangeness of a singularity is concentrated. Withou t this
precipitation there woul d be, quite simply, no "someone." An d
there would be no more interest or hospitality, desire or disgust, no
matter who or what it might be for.
"Someone" here is understood in the way a person might say
"it's hi m all right" about a photo, expressing by this "all right" the
covering over of a gap, making adequate what is inadequate, capable
of relating only to the "instantaneous" grasping of an instant
that is precisely its own gap. The photo— I have in min d an everyday,
banal photo—simultaneousl y reveals singularity, banality, and
our curiosity about one another. Th e principle of indiscernability
here becomes decisive. No t only are all people different but they
are also all different from one another. The y do not differ from an
archetype or a generality. Th e typical traits (ethnic, cultural, social,
generational, and so forth), whose particular patterns constitute another
level of singularity, do not abolish singular differences; in -
stead, they bring them into relief. As for singular differences, they
are not only "individual, " but infraindividual. It is never the case
that I have met Pierre or Mari e per se, but I have met hi m or her in
such and such a "form, " in such and such a "state," in such and
such a "mood, " and so on.
Thi s very humbl e layer of our everyday experience contains another
rudimentary ontological attestation: what we receive (rather
than what we perceive) with singularities is the discreet passage of
other origins of the world. Wha t occurs there, what bends, leans,
twists, addresses, denies—from the newborn to the corpse—i s neither
primaril y "someone close," nor an "other," nor a "stranger,"
nor "someone similar. " It is an origin; it is an affirmation of the
world, and we know that the world has no other origin than this
singular multiplicity of origins. Th e world always appears [surgit]11
each time according to a decidedly local turn [of events]. Its unity,
its uniqueness, and its totality consist in a combination of this
reticulated multiplicity, which produces no result.
Withou t this attestation, there woul d be no first attestation of
existence as such, that is, of the nonessence and non-subsistence-byitself
that is the basis of being-oneself. Thi s is why the Heideggerian
"one" is insufficient as the initial understanding o f existentielle
"everydayness." Heidegger confuses the everyday with the undifferentiated,
the anonymous , and the statistical. These are no less
important, but they can only constitute themselves in relation to
the differentiated singularity that the everyday already is by itself:
each day, each time, day to day. On e cannot affirm that the meaning
of Being must express itself starting from everydayness and
then begin by neglecting the general differentiation of the everyday,
its constantly renewed rupture, its intimate discord, its polymorphy
and its polyphony, its relief and its variety. A "day" is not
simply a unit for counting; it is the turning of the world—eac h
time singular. An d days, indeed every day, could not be similar if
they were not first different, difference itself. Likewise "people," or
rather "peoples," given the irreducible strangeness that constitutes
them as such, are themselves primarily the exposing of the singularity
according to which existence exists, irreducibly and primar -
ily—an d an exposition of singularity that experience claims to
communicate with, in the sense of "to" and "along with, " the totality
of beings. "Nature" is also "strange," and we exist there; we
exist in it in the mode of a constantly renewed singularity, whether
the singularity of the diversity and disparity of our senses or that
of the disconcerting profusion of nature's species or its various 
10 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 11
metamorphoses into "technology." The n again, we say "strange,"
"odd, " "curious," "disconcerting" about all of being.
Theme s of "wonder " and the "marvel of Being " are suspect if
they refer to an ecstatic mysticism that pretends to escape the world.
T he theme of scientific curiosity is no less suspect if it boils down
to a collector's preoccupation with rarities. In both cases, desire for
the exception presupposes disdain for the ordinary. Hegel was undoubtedly
the first to have this properly modern consciousness of
the violent paradox of a thinkin g whose ow n value is as yet un -
heard of, and whose domain is the grayness of the world. Thi s ordinary
grayness, the insignificance of the everyday—which the
Heideggerian "one" still bears the mark of—assume s an absent,
lost, or far away "grandeur." Yet, truth can be nothing if not the
truth of being in totality, that is, the totality of its "ordinariness,"
just as meaning can onl y be right at [à même] existence and nowhere
else. The modern world asks that this truth be thought: that
meaning is right at. It is in the indefinite plurality of origins and
their coexistence. Th e "ordinary" is always exceptional, however
little we understand its character as origin. Wha t we receive most
communall y as "strange" is that the ordinary itself is originary.
Wit h existence laid open in this way and the meaning of the world
being what it is, the exception is the rule. (Is this not the testimony
of the arts and literature? Is not the first and only purpose of their
strange existence the presentation of this strangeness? After all, in
the etymology of the word bizarre)1
 whether the word comes from
Basque or Arabic , there is a sense of valor, commanding presence,
and elegance.)
Gaining Access to the Origin
As a consequence, gaining access to the origin, 1 3
 entering into
meaning, comes down to exposing oneself to this truth.
Wha t this means is that we do not gain access to the origin: access
is refused by the origin's concealing itself in its multiplicity. We
do not gain access; that is, we do not penetrate the origin; we do
not identify with it. Mor e precisely, we do not identify ourselves in
it or as it, but with it, in a sense that must be elucidated here and is
nothing other than the meaning of originary coexistence.
T h e alterity of the other is its being-origin. Conversely, the originarity
of the origin is its being-other, but it is a being-other than
every being for and in crossing through [à travers] all being. Thus ,
the originarity of the origin is not a property that would distinguish
a being from all others, because this being would then have to be
something other than itself in order to have its origin in its ow n
turn. Thi s is the most classic of God's aporias, and the proof of his
nonexistence. In fact, this is the most immediate importance of
Kant's destruction of the ontological argument, which can be deciphered
in a quasi-literal manner ; the necessity of existence is
given right at the existing of all existences [l'exister de tout l'existant],
in its very diversity and contingency. In no way does this
constitute a supplementary Being. The world has no supplement. It
is supplemented in itself and, as such, is indefinitely supplemented
by the origin.
Thi s follows as an essential consequence: the being-other of the
origin is not the alterity of an "other-than-the-world. " It is not a
question of an Other (the inevitably "capitalized Other") 1 4
 than the
world; it is a question of the alterity or alteration of the world. In
other words, it is not a question of an aliud or an alius, or an
alienus, or an other in general as the essential stranger who is opposed
to what is proper, but of an alter, that is, "one of the two."
Thi s "other," this "lowercase other," is "one" among many insofar
as they are many; it is each one, and it is each time one, one among
them, one among all and one among us all. In the same way, and
reciprocally, "we" is always inevitably "us all, " where no one of us
can be "all " and each one of us is, in turn (where all our turns are
simultaneous as well as successive, in every sense), the other origin
of the same world.
T h e "outside" of the origin is "inside"—i n an inside more interior
than the extreme interior, that is, more interior than the intimacy
of the world and the intimacy that belongs to each "me." If
intimacy must be defined as the extremity of coincidence with oneself,
then what exceeds intimacy in inferiority is the distancing of 
12 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 13
coincidence itself. It is a coexistence of the origin "in " itself, a coexistence
of origins; it is no accident that we use the word "intimacy"
to designate a relation between several people more often
than a relation to oneself. Ou r being-with, as a being-many, is not
at all accidental, and it is in no way the secondary and random dispersion
of a primordial essence. It forms the proper and necessary
status and consistency of originary alterity as such. The plurality of
beings is at the foundation [fondment] of Being.
A single being is a contradiction in terms. Such a being, which
would be its own foundation, origin, and intimacy, would be incapable
of Being, in every sense that this expression can have here.
"Being " is neither a state nor a quality, but rather the action according
to which what Kant calls "the [mere] positing of a thing" 1 5
takes place ("is"). The very simplicity of "position" implies no more,
although no less, than its being discrete, in the mathematical sense,
or its distinction from, in the sense of with, other (at least possible)
positions, or its distinction among, in the sense of between, other
positions. In other words, every position is also dis-position, and,
considering the appearing that takes the place of and takes place in
the position, all appearance is co-appearance [com-parution]. Thi s
is why the meaning of Being is given as existence, being-in-oneselfoutside-oneself,
which we make explicit, we "humans, " but which
we make explicit, as I have said, for the totality of beings.
If the origin is irreducibly plural, if it is the indefinitely unfoldi
ng and variously multiplied intimacy of the world, then not gaini
ng access to the origin takes on another meaning. Its negativity is
neither that of the abyss, nor of the forbidden, nor of the veiled or
the concealed, nor of the secret, nor that of the unpresentable. It
need not operate, then, in the dialectical mode where the subject
must retain in itself its own negation (since it is the negation of its
o wn origin). No r does it have to operate in a mystical mode, which
is the reverse of the dialectical mode, where the subject must rejoice
in its negation. In both of these, negativity is given as the aliud,
where alienation is the process that must be reversed in terms of a
reappropriation. Al l forms of the "capitalized Other " presume this
alienation from the proper as their own; this is exactly what constitutes
the "capitalization" of the "Other, " its unified and broken
transcendence. But, in this way, all forms of the capitalized "Other "
represent precisely the exalted and overexalted mode of the propriety
of what is proper, which persists and consists in the "somewhere"
of a "nowhere" and in the "sometime" of a "no time, " that
is, in the punctum aeternum outside the world.
T he outside is inside; it is the spacing of the dis-position of the
world; it is our disposition and our co-appearance. Its "negativity"
changes meaning; it is not converted into positivity, but instead
corresponds to the mode of Being which is that of disposition/coappearance
and which , strictly speaking, is neither negative nor
positive, but instead the mode of being-together or being- with.
T he origin is together with other origins, originally divided. As a
matter of fact, we do have access to it. We have access exactly in
the mode of having access; we get there; we are on the brink, closest,
at the threshold; we touch the origin. "(Truly) we have access
(to the truth). . . . " , 6
 ["À la vérité, nous accédons . . . "] is Ba -
tailles phrase, 1 7
 the ambiguity of which I repeat even though I use
it in another way (in Bataille, it precedes the affirmation of an im -
mediate loss of access). Perhaps everything happens between loss
and appropriation: neither one nor the other, nor one and the
other, nor one in the other, but muc h more strangely than that,
much more simply.
"To reach1 8
 [toucher] the end" is again to risk missing it, because
the origin is not an end. End , like Principle, is a form of the Other.
To reach the origin is not to miss it; it is to be properly exposed to
it. Since it is not another thing (an aliud), the origin is neither
"missable" nor appropriable (penetrable, absorbable). It does not
obey this logic. It is the plural singularity of the Being of being. We
reach it to the extent that we are in touch wit h ourselves and in
touch with the rest of beings. We are in touch with ourselves insofar
as we exist. Being in touch with ourselves is what makes us "us,"
and there is no other secret to discover buried behind this very
touching, behind the "with" of coexistence.
We have access to the truth of the origin as many times as we are
in one another's presence and in the presence of the rest of beings.
I l , 
'4 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 15
Access is "coming to presence," but presence itself is dis-position,
the spacing of singularities. Presence is nowhere other than in
"coming to presence." We do not have access to a thing or a state,
but only to a coming. We have access to an access.
"Strangeness" refers to the fact that each singularity is another
access to the world. At the point where we woul d expect "something,
" a substance or a procedure, a principle or an end, a signification,
there is nothing but the manner, the turn of the other access,
which conceals itself in the very gesture wherein it offers itself
to us—an d whose concealing is the turning itself. In the singularity
that he exposes, each child that is born has already concealed
the access that he is "for himself " and in which he wil l conceal
himself "within himself," just as he will one day hide under the final
expression of a dead face. Thi s is why we scrutinize these faces
with such curiosity, in search of identification, looking to see who m
the child looks like, and to see if death looks like itself. Wha t we
are looking for there, like in the photographs, is not an image; it is
an access.
Is this not what interests us or touches us in "literature" and in
"the arts"? Wha t else interests us about the disjunction of the arts
among themselves, by which they are what they are as arts: plural
singulars? Wha t else are they but the exposition of an access concealed
in its own opening, an access that is, then, "inimitable, " untransportable,
untranslatable because it forms, each time, an absolute
point of translation, transmission, or transition of the origin
into origin. Wha t counts in art, what makes art art (and what
makes humans the artists of the world, that is, those who expose
the world for the world), is neither the "beautiful " nor the "sublime"
; it is neither "purposiveness without a purpose" nor the
"judgment of taste"; it is neither "sensible manifestation" nor the
"putting into work of truth. " Undoubtedly, it is all that, but in another
way: it is access to the scattered origin in its very scattering; it
is the plural touching of the singular origin. Thi s is what "the imitation
of nature" has always meant. Ar t always has to do with cosmogony,
but it exposes cosmogony for what it is: necessarily plural,
diffracted, discreet, a touch of color or tone, an agile turn of phrase
or folded mass, a radiance, a scent, a song, or a suspended movement,
exactly because it is the birth of a world (and not the construction
of a system). A world is always as many worlds as it takes
to make a world.
We only have access to ourselves—and to the world. It is only
ever a question of the following: full access is there, access to the
whole of the origin. Thi s is called "finitude" in Heideggerian terminology.
But it has become clear since then that "finitude" signifies
the infinite singularity of meaning, the infinite singularity of access
to truth. Finitude is the origin; that is, it is an infinity of origins.
"Origin " does not signify that from which the world comes, but
rather the coming of each presence of the world, each time singular.
The Creation of the World and Curiosity
T he concept of the "creation of the world" 1 9
 represents the origin
as originarily shared, spaced between us and between all beings.
This, in turn, contributes to rendering the concept of the "author"
of the world untenable. In fact, one could show how the motif of
creation is one of those that leads directly to the death of Go d understood
as author, first cause, and supreme being. Furthermore, if
one looks at metaphysics carefully, there is not a Go d who simply
and easily conforms to the idea of a producer. Whether in Augustine,
Aquinas, Descartes, Malebranche, Spinoza, or Leibniz, one always
finds that the theme of creation is burdened with and misrepresented
as a problem of production, right up until the decisive
moment of the ontological argument's downfall. (Hegel's restoration
of the argument, the one to which Schelling assigned significant im -
portance, is nothing but an elaboration of the concept of creation.)
T he distinctive characteristic of the concept of creation is not
that it posits a creator, but that, on the contrary, it renders the "creator"
indistinct from its "creation." (It has to be said, here, in a general
way, that the distinctive characteristic of Western monotheism
is not the positing of a single god, but rather the effacing of the divine
as such in the transcendence of the world. Wit h respect to the
question of origin, this is surely the precise point at which the link 
i 6 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 17
is forged that makes us unfailingly Jew-Greek in every respect. And ,
with respect to the question of destination, this is the point from
which we are sent into the "global" space as such. 2 0 ) In mythological
cosmogonies, a god or demiurge makes a world starting from a
situation that is already there, whatever this situation may be. 2 1
 In
creation, however, it is the being-already-there of the already-there
that is of concern. In fact, if creation is ex nihilo, this does not signify
that a creator operates "starting from nothing. " As a rich and
complex tradition demonstrates, this fact instead signifies two
things: on the one hand, it signifies that the "creator" itself is the
nihil', on the other, it signifies that this nihil is not, logically speaking,
something "from which" ["d'où"] what is created would come
[provenir], but the very origin [provenance], and destination, of
some thing in general and of everything. No t only is the nihil nothing
prior but there is also no longer a "nothing" that preexists creation;
it is the act of appearing [surgissement], it is the very origin —
insofar as this is understood only as what is designated by the verb
"to originate." If the nothing is not anything prior, then only the ex
remains—if one can talk about it like this—t o qualify creation-inaction,
that is, the appearing or arrival [venue] in nothing (in the
sense that we talk about someone appearing "i n person").
T h e nothing, then, is nothing other than the dis-position of the
appearing. The origin is a distancing. It is a distancing that imme -
diately has the magnitude of all space-time and is also nothing other
than the interstice of the intimacy of the world: the among-being
[l'entre-étant] of all beings. Thi s among-being itself is nothing but
[a] being, and has no other consistency, movement, or configuration
than that of the being-a-being [l'etre-étant] of all beings. Being,
or the among, shares the singularities of all appearings. Creation
takes place everywhere and always—but it is this unique event, or
advent, only on the condition of being each time what it is, or being
what it is only "at each time, " each time appearing singularly.
O ne can understand how the creation, as it appears in any JewishChristian-Islami
c theologico-mystic configuration, testifies less
(and certainly never exclusively) to a productive power of Go d
than to his goodness and glory. In relation to such power, then,
creatures are only effects, while the love and glory of Go d are deposited
right at [à même] the level of what is created; that is, creatures
are the very brilliance [éclat]11 of God's coming to presence.
It is necessary, then, to understand the theme of the "image of
God " and/or the "trace of God " not according to the logic of a secondary
imitation, but according to this other logic where "God " is
itself the singular appearance of the image or trace, or the disposition
of its exposition: place as divine place, the divine as strictly local.
As a consequence, this is no longer "divine, " but is the dislocation
and dis-position of the worl d (what Spinoza calls "the
divine extension") as that opening and possibility [ressource] which
comes from further away and goes farther, infinitely farther, than
any god.
If "creation" is indeed this singular ex-position of being, then its
real name is existence. Existence is creation, our creation; it is the
beginning and end that tware. Thi s is the thought that is the most
necessary for us to think. If we do not succeed in thinking it, then
we will never gain access to who we are, we who are no more than
us in a world, which is itself no more than the world—bu t we who
have reached this point precisely because we have thought logos (the
self-presentation of presence) as creation (as singular coming).
Thi s thinking is in no way anthropocentric; it does not put humanity
at the center of "creation"; on the contrary, it transgresses
[traverse] humanit y in the excess of the appearing that appears on
the scale of the totality of being, but which also appears as that excess
[démesure] which is impossible to totalize. It is being's infinite
original singularity. In humanity, or rather right at [à même] hu -
manity, existence is exposed and exposing. The simplest way to put
this into language woul d be to say that humanit y speaks existence,
but what speaks through its speech says the whole of being. Wha t
Heidegger calls "the ontico-ontological privilege" of Dasein is neither
its prerogative nor its privilege [apanage]: it gets Being on its
way [// engage l'être], but the Being of Dasein is nothing other than
the Being of being.
If existence is exposed as such by humans, what is exposed there
also holds for the rest of beings. There is not, on the one side, an 
18 Being Singular Plural
originary singularity and then, on the other, a simple being-there of
things, more or less given for our use. On the contrary, in exposing
itself as singularity, existence exposes the singularity of Being as such
in all being. The difference between humanit y and the rest of being
(which is not a concern to be denied, but the nature of which is,
nevertheless, not a given), while itself being inseparable from other
differences within being (since man is "also" animal, "also" living,
"also" physio-chemical), does not distinguish true existence from a
sort of subexistence. Instead, this difference forms the concrete condition
of singularity. We woul d not be "humans" if there were not
"dogs" and "stones." A stone is the exteriority of singularity in what
would have to be called its mineral or mechanical actuality [litteralité}.
But I would no longer be a "human" if I did not have this
exteriority "i n me," in the form of the quasi-minerality of bone: I
would no longer be a human if I were not a body, a spacing of all
other bodies and a spacing of "me" in "me." A singularity is always
a body, and all bodies are singularities (the bodies, their states, their
movements, their transformations).
Existence, therefore, is not a property of Dasein; it is the original
singularity of Being, which Dasein exposes for all being. Thi s
is why humanit y is not "i n the world " as it woul d be in a milieu
(why would the milieu be necessary?); it is in the world insofar as
the world is its own exteriority, the proper space of its being-outin-the-world.
But it is necessary to go farther than this in order to
avoid giving the impression that the world, despite everything, remains
essentially "the worl d of humans. " It is not so muc h the
world of humanity as it is the world of the nonhuman to which humanit
y i s exposed and which humanity, in turn, exposes. On e
could try to formulate it in the following way: humanity is the exposing
of the world; it is neither the end nor the ground of the world;
the world is the exposure of humanity; it is neither the environment
nor the representation of humanity.
Therefore, however far humanit y is from being the end of nature
or nature the end of humanit y (we have already tried all the
variations of this formula), the end is always being-in-the-world
and the being-world of all being.
Being Singular Plural 19
Even supposing one still wished to take the world as the representation
of humanity, this would not necessarily impl y a solipsism
of humanity: because, if that is the case, then it is the representation
itself that instructs me about what it necessarily represents to
me, an irrefutable exteriority as my exteriority. Th e representation
of a spacing is itself a spacing. An intuitus originarius, which would
not be a representation but rather an immersion in the thing-itself,
would exist alone and woul d be for itself the origin and the thing:
this was shown above to be contradictory. Descartes himself testifies
to the exteriority of the world as the exteriority of his body. Because
he hardly doubts his body, he makes a fiction of doubting it,
and this pretension as such attests to the truth of res extensa. It is
also not surprising that for Descartes the reality of this world,
about which Go d could not deceive me, is maintained in Being by
the continuous creation on the part of this very God . Reality is always
in each instant, from place to place, each time in turn, which
is exactly how the reality of res cogitans attests to itself in each "ego
sum, " which is each time the "I am" of each one in turn [chaque
fois de chacun à son tour].
Onc e again, this is the way in which there is no Other . "Cre -
ation" signifies precisely that there is no Othe r and that the "there
is" is not an Other . Being is not the Other , but the origin is the
punctual and discrete spacing between us, as between us and the rest
of the world, as between all beings.25
We find this alterity primarily and essentially intriguing. It in -
trigues us because it exposes the always-other origin, always inappropriat
e and always there, each and every time present as inim -
itable. Thi s is why we are primaril y and essentially curious about
the world and about ourselves (where "the world " is the generic
name of the object of this ontological curiosity). Th e correlate of
creation, understood as existence itself, is a curiosity that must be
understood in a completely different sense than the one given by
Heidegger. For him , curiosity is the frantic activity of passing from
being to being in an insatiable sort of way, without ever being able
to stop and think. Withou t a doubt, this does testify to being-withone-another,
but it testifies to it without being able to gain access to 
2 0 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 21
the existent opening that characterizes Dasein in the "instant." 2 4
 It
is necessary, then, to disconnect the most primitive layer of curiosity,
the level on which we are primarily interested by what is interesting
par excellence (the origin), from this inconsistent curiosity
and also from the attention that takes care of others (Fiirsorge). At
this level, we are interested in the sense of being intrigued by the
ever-renewed alterity of the origin and, if I may say so, in the sense
of having an affair with it. (It is no accident that sexual curiosity is
an exemplary figure of curiosity and is, in fact, more than just a figure
o f it.)
As English [and French] allows us to say, other beings are curious
(or bizarre) to me because they give me access to the origin; they
allow me to touch it; they leave me before it, leave me before its
turning, which is concealed each time. Whether an other is another
person, animal, plant, or star, it is above all the glaring presence of
a place and moment of absolute origin, irrefutable, offered as such
a nd vanishing in its passing. Thi s occurs in the face of a newborn
child, a face encountered by chance on the street, an insect, a shark,
a pebble . . . but if one really wants to understand it, it is not a
matter of making all these curious presences equal.
If we do not have access to the other in the mode just described,
but seek to appropriate the origin—whic h is something we always
do—the n this same curiosity transforms itself into appropriative or
destructive rage. We no longer look for a singularity of the origin
in the other; we look for the unique and exclusive origin, in order to
either adopt it or reject it. The other becomes the Othe r according
to the mode of desire or hatred. Makin g the other divine (together
with our voluntary servitude) or making it evil (together with its
exclusion or extermination) is that part of curiosity no longer in -
terested in dis-position and co-appearance, but rather has become
the desire for the Position itself. Thi s desire is the desire to fix the
origin, or to give the origin to itself, once and for all, and in one place
for all, that is, always outside the world. Thi s is why such desire is a
desire for murder, and not only murder but also for an increase of
cruelty and horror, which is like the tendency toward the intensification
of murder; it is mutilation, carving up, relentlessness, meticulous
execution, the joy of agony. Or it is the massacre, the mass
grave, massive and technological execution, the bookkeeping of the
camps. It is always a matter of expediting the transformation of the
other into the Othe r or making the Othe r appear in the place of
the other, and, therefore, a matter of identifying the Othe r and the
origin itself.
T he Othe r is nothing more than a correlate of this mad desire,
but others, in fact, are our originary interests. It is true, however, that
the possibility of this mad desire is contained in the very disposition
of originary interests: the dissemination of the origin upsets
[affole] the origin in "me" to exactly the same extent that it makes
me curious about it, makes "me" a "me" (or a "subject," someone
in any case). (It follows, then, that no ethics would be independent
from an ontology. Onl y ontology, in fact, may be ethical in a consistent
manner. It will be necessary to return to this elsewhere.)
Between Us: First Philosophy
Whe n addressing the fact that philosophy is contemporaneous
with the Greek city, one ends up losing sight of what is in question—an
d rightly so. As i s onl y fitting, however, losing sight of
what is in question returns us to the problem in all its acuity after
these twenty-eight centuries.
It returns us to the question of the origin of our history. There is
no sense of reconstituting a teleology here, and it is not a matter of
retracing a process directed toward an end. To the contrary, history
clearly appears here as the movement sparked by a singular cir -
cumstance, a movement that does not reabsorb this singularity in
a universality (or "universal history," as Mar x and Nietzsche understood
it), but instead reflects the impact of this singularity in renewed
singular events. Thus , we have a "future" [avenir] and a "to
come" [à venir]; we have this "future" as a "past," which is not past
in the sense of being the starting point of a directed process, but
past in the sense of being a "curiosity" ["bizarrerie"] (the "Greek
miracle") that is itself intriguing and, as such, remains still "to
come." Thi s dis-position of history indeed makes there be a history 
2 2 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 2 3
and not a processus (here as elsewhere, the Hegelian mode l reveals
itself as uncovering the truth by way of its exact opposite). On e can
understand, then, Heidegger's "history of Being, " and understand
that our relation to this history is necessarily that of its Destruktion,
or deconstruction. In other words, it is a matter of bringing to light
this history's singularity as the disassembling law of its unit y and
understanding that this law itself is the law of meaning.
Thi s clearly supposes that such a task is as demanding and urgent
as it is impossible to measure. Th e task is to understand how
history—a s a singular, Western accident—"became " what one
might call "global " or "planetary" without, at the same time, engendering
itself as "universal." Consequently, it is the task of understanding
how the Wes t disappeared, not by reciting the formulas
of its generalized uniformity, but by understanding the
expansion, by and through this "uniformity," of a plural singularity
that is and is not, at the same time, "proper" to this "o/accident."
A n d one must understand that this formidable question is none
other than the question of "capital " (or of "capitalism"). If one
wants to give a full account of "capital"—starting from the very
first moments of history that began in the merchant cities—then it
is necessary to remove it, far more radically than Mar x could have,
from its own representation in linear and cumulative history, as
well as from the representation of a teleological history of its overcoming
or rejection. Thi s would appear to be the—problematic —
lesson of history. But we cannot understand this task unless we first
understand what is most at stake in our history, that is, what is
most at stake in philosophy.
According to different versions, but in a predominantly uniform
manner, the tradition put forward a representation according to
which philosophy and the city woul d be (would have been, must
have been) related to one another as subjects. Accordingly, philosophy,
as the articulation of logos, is the subject of the city, where
the city is the space of this articulation. Likewise, the city, as the
gathering of the logikoi, is the subject of philosophy, where philosophy
is the production of their commo n logos. Logos itself, then,
contains the essence or meaning of this reciprocity: it is the comm
on foundation of community, where community, in turn, is the
foundation of Being.
It is within this uniform horizon, according to different versions
(whether strong or weak, happy or unhappy) of this predominant
mode of inquiry, that we still understand the famous "political animal
" o f Aristotle: it is to presume that logos is the condition o f
community, which, in turn, is the condition of humanity; and/or it
is to presume that each of these three terms draws its unit y and
consistency from [its sharing] a communication of essence with the
other two (where the worl d as such remains relatively exterior to
the whole affair, presuming that nature or physis accomplishes itself
in humanity understood as logos politikos, whereas technë subordinates
itself to both).
But this horizon—tha t of political philosophy in the fullest
sense (not as the "philosophy of politics," but philosophy as politics)—might
very well be what points to the singular situation
where our history gets under way and, at the same time, blocks access
to this situation. Or instead, this horizon might be that which,
in the course of its history, gives an indication of its own deconstruction
and exposes this situation anew in another way. 2 5
 "Philosophy
and politics" is the exposition [énoncé] of this situation.
But it is a disjunctive exposition, because the situation itself is disjunctive.
Th e city is not primarily "community, " any more than it
is primarily "public space." The city is at least as much the bringing
to light of being-in-common as the dis-position (dispersal and disparity)
of the communit y represented as founded in interioriry or
transcendence. It is "community " without commo n origin. Tha t
being the case, and as long as philosophy is an appeal to the origin,
the city, far from being philosophy's subject or space, is its problem.
Or else, it is its subject or space in the mode of being its problem,
its aporia. Philosophy, for its part, can appeal to the origin
only on the condition o f the dis-position o f logos (that is, of the origin
as justified and set into discourse): logos is the spacing at the
very place of the origin. Consequently, philosophy is the problem
of the city; philosophy covers over the subject that is expected as
"community. " 
2 4 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural *5
Thi s is why philosophical politics and political philosophy regularly
run aground on the essence of communit y or communit y as
origin. Rousseau and Mar x are exemplary in their struggle wit h
these obstacles. Rousseau revealed the aporia of a communit y that
would have to precede itself in order to constitute itself: in its very
concept, the "social contract" is the denial or foreclosure of the originary
division [déliaison] between those singularities that woul d
have to agree to the contract and, thereby, "draw it to a close." Al -
though assuredly more radical in his demand for the dissolution of
politics in all spheres of existence (which is the "realization of philosophy"),
Mar x ignores that the separation between singularities
overcome and suppressed in this way is not, in fact, an accidental
separation imposed by "political " authority, but rather the constitutive
separation of dis-position. However powerful it is for thinking
the "real relation" and what we call the "individual, " "communism"
was still not able to think being-in-common as distinct from
community.
In this sense, philosophical politics regularly proceeds according
to the surreptitious appeal to a metaphysics of the one-origin,
where, at the same time, it nevertheless exposes, volens nolens, the
situation of the dis-position of origins. Often the result is that the
dis-position is turned into a matter of exclusion, included as excluded,
and that all philosophical politics is a politics of exclusivity
and the correlative exclusion—o f a class, of an order, of a "community"—th
e point of which is to end up with a "people," in the
"base" sense of the term. The demand for equality, then, is the necessary,
ultimate, and absolute gesture; in fact, it is almost indicative
of dis-position as such. However, as long as this continues to
be a matter of an "egalitarian demand founded upon some generic
identity," 2 6
 equality will never do justice [ne fait encore pas droit] to
singularity or even recognize the considerable difficulties of wanting
to do so. It is here that the critique of abstract rights comes to
the fore. However, the "concrete" that must oppose such abstraction
is not made up primarily of empirical determinations, which,
in the capitalist regime, exhaust even the most egalitarian will :
rather, concrete hete. primarily signifies the real object o f a thinking
0 f being-in-common, and this real object is, in turn, the singular
plural of the origin, the singular plural of the origin of "commu -
nity" itself (if one still wants to call this "community"). Al l of this is
undoubtedly what is indicated by the word that follows "equality"
in the French republican slogan: "fraternity" is supposed to be the
solution to equality (or to "equiliberty" ["égaliberté"]) 2 7
 by evoking
or invoking a "generic identity." Wha t is lacking there is exactly
the commo n origin of the common. 2 8
It is "lacking" insofar as one attempts to take account of it within
the horizon of philosophical politics. Onc e this horizon is deconstructed,
however, the necessity of the plural singular of the origin
comes into play—an d this is already under way. But I do not plan
to propose an "other politics" under this heading. I am no longer
sure that this term (or the term "political philosophy" ) can continue
to have any consistency beyond this opening up of the horizon
which comes to us both at the end of the long history of our
Western situation and as the reopening of this situation. I onl y
want to help to bring out that the combination philosophy-politics,
in all the force o f its being joined together, simultaneously exposes
and hides the dis-position of the origin and co-appearance, which is
its correlate.
T he philosophico-political horizon is what links the dis-position
to a continuity and to a communit y of essence. In order to be effective,
such a relation requires an essentializing procedure: sacrifice.
If one looks carefully, one can find the place of sacrifice in all
political philosophy (or rather, one wil l find the challenge of the
abstract, which makes a sacrifice of concrete singularity). But as singular
origin, existence is unsacrificable. 2 9
In this respect, then, the urgent demand named above is not another
political abstraction. Instead, it is a reconsideration of the very
meaning of "politics"—and, therefore, of "philosophy"—in light of
the originary situation: the bare exposition of singular origins. Thi s
is the necessary "first philosophy" (in the canonical sense of the expression).
It is an ontology. Philosophy needs to recommence, to
restart itself from itself against itself, against political philosophy
and philosophical politics. In order to do this, philosophy needs to 
2 6 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 2 7
think in principle about how we are "us" among us, that is, how the
consistency of our Being is in being-in-common, and how this consists
precisely in the "in " or in the "between" of its spacing.
T h e last "first philosophy," if one dare say anything about it, is
given to us in Heidegger's fundamental ontology. It is that which
has put us on the way [chemin] to where we are, together, whether
we know it or not. But it is also why its author was able to, in a sort
of return of Destruktion itself, compromise himself, in an unpar- i
donable way, with his involvement in a philosophical politics that
became criminal. Thi s very point, then, indicates to us that place
from which first philosophy must recommence: it is necessary to
refigure fundamental ontology (as well as the existential analytic,
the history of Being, and the thinking of Ereignis that goes along
with it) with a thorough resolve that starts from the plural singular
of origins, from being-with.
I want to return to the issue of "first philosophy" in order to push
it even further, but without claiming to be the one who can fully accomplish
such an undertaking. By definition and in essence, the
above "first philosophy" needs "to be made by all, not by one," like
the poetry of Maldoror. For the moment, I only want to indicate the
principle of its necessity. Heidegger clearly states that being-with
#1 {Mitsein, Miteinandersein, and Mitdasein) is essential to the constitution
of Dasein itself. Give n this, it needs to be made absolutely
clear that Dasein, far from being either "man" or "subject," is not
even an isolated and unique "one," but is instead always the one,
each one, with one another [l'un-avec-l autre]. If this determination
is essential, then it needs to attain to the co-originary dimension and
expose it without reservation. But as it has often been said, despite
this affirmative assertion of co-originariry, he gives up on the step to
the consideration of Dasein itself. It is appropriate, then, to examine
the possibility of an explicit and endless exposition of co-originarity
and the possibility of taking account of what is at stake in the togetherness
of the ontological enterprise (and, in this way, taking account
of what is at stake in its political consequences.) 3 0
It is necessary to add here that there is a reason for this examination
which is far more profound than what first appears to be a
simple "readjustment" of the Heideggerian discourse. Th e reason
obviously goes much farther than that, since at its fullest, it is about
nothing less than the possibility of speaking "of Dasein'' in general,
or of saying "the existing" or "existence." Wha t woul d happen to
philosophy if speaking about Being in other ways than saying "we,"
"you," and "I " became excluded? Wher e is Being spoken, and who
speaks Being?
T he reason that is foreshadowed has to do precisely with speaking
(of) Being. Th e themes of being-with and co-originarity need
to be renewed and need to "reinitialize" the existential analytic, exactly
because these are meant to respond to the question of the
meaning of Being, or to Being as meaning. But if the meaning of
Being indicates itself principally by the putting into play of Being
in Dasein and as Dasein, then, precisely as meaning, this putting
into play (the "there wil l be" of Being) can only attest to itself or
expose itself in the mode of being-with: because as relates to meaning,
it is never for just one, but always for one another, always between
one another. The meaning of Being is never in what is said —
never said in significations. But it is assuredly in them that "it is
spoken," in the absolute sense of the expression. "On e speaks," "it
speaks," means "Being is spoken"; it is meaning (but does not construct
meaning). But "one" or "it " is never other than we.
In other words, in revealing itself as what is at stake in the meaning
of Being, Dasein has already revealed itself as being-with and
reveals itself as such before any other explication. Th e meaning of
Being is not in play in Dasein in order to be "communicated" to
others; its putting into play is identically being-with. Or again: Being
is put into play as the "with" that is absolutely indisputable.
From now on, this is the minima l ontological premise. Being is put
into play among us; it does not have any other meaning except the
dis-position of this "between."
Heidegger writes, "Dasein's. . . understanding of Being already
implies the understanding of others." 3 1
 But this surely does not say
enough. The understanding of Being is nothing other than an understanding
of others, which means, in every sense, understanding
others through "me" and understanding "me" through others, the 
2 8 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 2 9
understanding of one another [des uns des autres}. On e could sayeven
more simply that Being is communication. But it remains to
be known what "communication" is.
For the moment, it is less important to respond to the question
of the meaning of Being (if it is a question, and if we do not already
basically respond every day and each time . . . ) than it is to
pay attention to the fact of its exhibition. If "communication" is for
us, today, such an affair—i n every sense of the word . . . —i f its
theories are flourishing, if its technologies are being proliferated, if
the "mediatization" of the "media" brings along with it an autocommunicationa
l vertigo, if one plays around with the theme of
the indistinctness between the "message" and the "medium" out of
either a disenchanted or jubilant fascination, then it is because
something is exposed or laid bare. In fact, [what is exposed] is the
bare and "content"-less web of "communication. " On e could say it
is the bare web of the com- (of the telecom-, said with an acknowledgment
of its independence); that is, it is our web or "us" as web
or network, an us that is reticulated and spread out, with its extension
for an essence and its spacing for a structure. We are "ourselves"
too inclined to see in this the overwhelming destiny of
modernity. Contrar y to such meager evidence, it might be that we
have understood nothing about the situation, and rightly so, and
that we have to start again to understand ourselves—our existence
a nd that of the world, our being disposed in this way.
Being Singular Plural
Being singular plural: these three apposite words, which do not
have any determined syntax ("being" is a verb or noun; "singular"
a nd "plural " are nouns or adjectives; all can be rearranged in different
combinations), mark an absolute equivalence, both in an indistinct
tfWdistinct way. Being is singularly plural and plurally singular.
Yet, this in itself does not constitute a particular predication
of Being, as if Being is or has a certain numbe r of attributes, one
of which is that of being singular-plural—however double, contradictory,
or chiasmatic this may be. On the contrary, the singularplural
constitutes the essence of Being, a constitution that undoes
or dislocates every single, substantial essence of Being itself. Thi s
is not just a way of speaking, because there is no prior substance
that would be dissolved. Being does not preexist its singular plural.
To be more precise, Being absolutely does not preexist; nothing
preexists; only what exists exists. Ever since Parmenides, one of philosophy's
peculiarities has been that it has been unfolding this
unique proposition, in all of its senses. Thi s proposition proposes
nothing but the placement [la position] and dis-position of existence.
It is its plural singularity. Unfolding this proposition, then, is
the only thing philosophy has to do.' 2
That which exists, whatever this might be, coexists because it exists.
Th e co-implication of existing [l'exister] is the sharing of the
world. A world is not something external to existence; it is not an
extrinsic addition to other existences; the world is the coexistence
that puts these existences together. But one could object that there
exists something [which does not first coexist]. Kant established
that there exists something, exactly because I can think of a possible
existence: but the possible comes second in relation to the real,
because there already exists something real. 3 3
It would also be worth adding that the above inference actually
leads to a conclusion about an element of existence's plurality [un
pluriel d'existence}: there exists something ("me") and another thing
(this other "me" that represents the possible) to which I relate myself
in order for me to ask myself if there exists something of the
sort that I think of as possible. Thi s something coexists at least as
much as "me." But this needs to be drawn out in the following way:
there does not exist just these "me's," understood as subjects-ofrepresentation,
because along with the real difference between two
"me's" is given the difference between things in general, the difference
between my body and many bodies. Thi s variation on an older
style of philosophizing is onl y meant to point out that there has
never been, nor will there ever be, any [real] philosophical solipsism.
In a certain way, there never has been, and never wil l be, a philosophy
"of the subject" in the sense of the final [infinie] closure in itself
of a for-itself. 
30 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 3i
However, there is for the whole of philosophy what is exemplified
in Hegel's statement "the I is in essence and act the universal:
a nd such partnership (Gemeinschafilichkeit) is a form, though an
external form, of universality." 3 4
 It is well know n that dialectical
logic requires the passage through exteriority as essential to inferiority
itself. Nevertheless, within this logic, it is the "interior " and
subjective form of the "Me " that is needed in order to finish the
project of finding itself and posing itself as the truth of the universal
and its community. As a consequence, what is left for us to hold
onto is the moment of "exteriority" as being of almost essential
value, so essential that it woul d no longer be a matter of relating
this exteriority to any individual or collective "me" without also unfailingly
attaining [maintenir] to exteriority itself and as such.
Being singular plural means the essence of Being is onl y as coessence.
In turn, coessence, or being-with (being-with-many), designates
the essence of the co-, or even more so, the co- (the cum) itself
in the position or guise of an essence. In fact, coessentiality
cannot consist in an assemblage of essences, where the essence of
this assemblage as such remains to be determined. In relation to
such an assemblage, the assembled essences woul d become [mere]
accidents. Coessentiality signifies the essential sharing of essentiality,
sharing in the guise of assembling, as it were. Thi s could also
be put in the following way: if Being is being-with, then it is, in its
being-with, the "with" that constitutes Being; the with is not simply
an addition. Thi s operates in the same way as a collective [collégial]
power: power is neither exterior to the members of the collective
[college] nor interior to each one of them, but rather consists
in the collectivity [collégialité] as such.
Therefore, it is not the case that the "with" is an addition to some
prior Being; instead, the "with" is at the heart of Being. In this respect,
it is absolutely necessary to reverse the order of philosophical
exposition, for which it has been a matter of course that the
"with"—an d the other that goes along with it—alway s comes second,
even though this succession is contradicted by the underlying
[profonde] logic in question here. Even Heidegger preserves this order
of succession in a remarkable way, in that he does not introduce
the co-originarity of Mitsein until after having established the originary
character of Dasein. The same remark could be made about
the Husserlian constitution of the alter ego, even though this too is
in its own way contemporaneous (once again, the cum) with the
ego in the "single universal community." 3 5
To the contrary, it can also be shown that when Hegel begins the
Phenomenology of Spirit Wiû\ the moment of "sense certainty," where
it appears that consciousness has not yet entered into relation with
another consciousness, this moment is nonetheless characterized by
the language with which consciousness appropriates for itself the
truth of what is immediately sensible (the famous "now it is night").
In doing so, the relation to another consciousness remains surreptitiously
presupposed. It would be easy to produce many observations
of this kind. For example, the evidence for the ego sum comes down
to, constitutively and co-originarily, its possibility in each one of
Descartes's readers. Th e evidence as evidence owes its force, and its
claim to truth, precisely to this possibility in each one of us—on e
could say, the copossibility. Ego sum = ego cum.*'
In this way, it can be shown that, for the whole of philosophy,
the necessary successivity [la successivité] of any exposition does not
prevent the deeply set [profond] order of reasons from being regulated
by a co-originarity [soit réglé sur une co-originarité]. In fact,
in proposing to reverse the order of ontological exposition, I am
only proposing to bring to light a resource that is more or less obscurely
presented throughout the entire history of philosophy —
and presented as an answer to the situation described above: philosophy
begins with and in "civil " ["concitoyenne"] coexistence as
such (which, in its very difference from the "imperial " form, forces
power to emerge as a problem). Or rather, the "city" is not primar -
ily a form o f political institution; it is primarily being-with as such.
Philosophy is, in sum, the thinking of being-with; because of this,
it is also thinking-with as such.
Thi s is not simpl y a matter of clarifying a still faulty exposition.
.. . It is just as much a question of doing justice to the essential
reasons for why, across the whole history of philosophy, beingwith
is subordinated to Being and, at the same time and according 
3 2 Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 33
to this very subordination, is always asserting [de faire valoir] its
problem as the very problem of Being. In sum, being-with is Being's
own most problem. Th e task is to know why and how this is so. 3 7
Let us take up the matter again, then, not beginning from the
Being of being and proceeding to being itself being with-oneanother
[étant l'un-avec-lautre], but starting from being—an d all
of being—determine d in its Being as being with-one-another.
[Thi s is the] singular plural in such a way that the singularity of
each is indissociable from its being-with-many and because, in general,
a singularity is indissociable from a plurality. Here again, it is
not a question of any supplementary property of Being. The concept
of the singular implies its singularization and, therefore, its
distinction from other singularities (which is different from any
concept of the individual, since an immanent totality, without an
other, would be a perfect individual, and is also different from any
concept of the particular, since this assumes the togetherness of
which the particular is a part, so that such a particular can only present
its difference from other particulars as numerical difference).
In Latin, the term singuli already says the plural, because it designates
the "one" as belonging to "one by one." The singular is primarily
each one and, therefore, also with and among all the others.
T he singular is a plural. It also undoubtedly offers the property of
indivisibility, but it is not indivisible the way substance is indivisible.
It is, instead, indivisible in each instant [au coup par coup],
within the event of its singularization. It is indivisible like any in -
stant is indivisible, which is to say that it is infinitely divisible, or
punctually indivisible. Moreover, it is not indivisible like any particular
is indivisible, but on the condition o f pars pro toto: the singular
is each time for the whole, in its place and in light of it. (If
humanit y is for being in totality in the way I have tried to present
it, then it is the exposing of the singular as such and in general.) A
singularity does not stand out against the background of Being; it
is, when it is, Being itself or its origin.
Onc e again, it is fairly easy to see to what extent these features
answer to those of the Cartesian ego sum. The singular is an ego that
is not a "subject" in the sense of the relation of a self to itself. It is
an "ipseity" that is not the relation of a "me" to "itself." 3 8
 It is neither
"me" nor "you" ; it is what is distinguished in the distinction,
what is discreet in the discretion. It is being-a-part of Being itself
and in Being itself, Being in each instant [au coup par coup], which
attests to the fact that Being only takes place in each instant.
T h e essence o f Being is the shock o f the instant [le coup]. Each
time, "Being" is always an instance [un coup] of Being (a lash, blow,
beating, shock, knock, an encounter, an access). As a result, it is
also always an instance of "with" : singulars singularly together,
where the togetherness is neither the sum, nor the incorporation
[englobant], nor the "society," nor the "community " (where these
words only give rise to problems). The togetherness of singulars is
singularity "itself." It "assembles" them insofar as it spaces them;
they are "linked" insofar as they are not unified.
According to these conditions , Being as being-with might no
longer be able to say itself in the third person, as in "it is" or "there
is." Because there would no longer be a point of view that is exterior
to being-together from which it could be announced that
"there is" being and a being-with of beings, one wit h the other.
There would be no "it is" and, therefore, no longer the "I am" that
is subjacent to the announcement of the "it is." Rather, it woul d
be necessary to think the third-person singular in the first person.
As such, then, it becomes the first-person plural. Being could not
speak of itself except in this unique manner: "we are." Th e truth
of the ego sum is the nos sumus; this "we" announces itself through
humanity for all the beings "we" are with, for existence in the sense
of being-essentially-with, as a Being whose essence is the with.
("One wil l speak . . . ": Whic h one? We wil l speak: Wh o is this
"we"? Ho w can I say "us" for those of you who are reading this?
H o w can I say "us" for me? Althoug h this is what we are in the
process of doing , how do we think together, whether we are "i n
accord" or not? Ho w are we with one another? Al l of this is to ask:
Wha t is at play in our communication, in this book, in its sentences,
and in the whol e situation that more or less gives them
some meaning? [Thi s is the] question of philosophy as "literature,"
which is about asking how far it is possible to take the third-
34 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 35
person discourse of philosophy. At what point must ontology become
. . . what? Become conversation? Become lyricism? . . . Th e
strict conceptual rigor of being-with exasperates the discourse of
its concept. . . . )
Wha t is know n as "society," therefore, in the broadest and most
diffuse sense of the word, is the figure [chiffre] of an ontology yet
to be put into play. Rousseau presented [a glimpse of] it by making
the poorly named "contract" the very event that "made a creature
of intelligence and a man . . . from a stupid, limited animal," 3 9
a nd not simpl y an arrangement between individuals . (Nietzsche
confirms this presentation in a paradoxical way when Zarathustra
says, "human society: that is an experiment .. . a long search . . .
and nota, 'contract'". 4 0 ) Mar x saw it when he qualified humanit y
as social in its very origin, production, and destination, and when
the entire movement and posture of his thinking assigned Being
itself to this social being. Heidegger designated it in positing being-with
as constitutive of being-there. No one, however, has radically
thematized the "with" as the essential trait of Being and as its
proper plura l singular coessence. But they have brought us, together
and individually, to the point where we can no longer avoid
thinking about this in favor of that to which all of contemporary
experience testifies. In other words, what is at stake is no longer
thinking :
—beginning from the one, or from the other,
—beginning from their togetherness, understood now as the One,
now as the Other,
—bu t thinking, absolutely and without reserve, beginning from the
"with," as the proper essence of one whose Being is nothing other than
with-one-another [l'un-avec-l'autre].
T h e one/the other is neither "by," nor "for," nor "in, " nor "despite,"
but rather "with. " Thi s "with" is at once both more and less
than "relation" or "bond, " especially if such relation or bond presupposes
the préexistence of the terms upon which it relies; the
"with" is the exact contemporary of its terms; it is, in fact, their
contemporaneity. "With " is the sharing of time-space; it is the atthe-same-time-in-the-same-place
as itself, in itself, shattered. It is
the instant scaling back of the principle of identity: Being is at the
same time in the same place only on the condition of the spacing of
an indefinite plurality of singularities. Being is with Being; it does
not ever recover itself, but it is near to itself, beside itself, in touch
with itself, its very self, in the paradox of that proximity where distancing
[éloignement] and strangeness are revealed. We are each
time an other, each time with others. "With " does not indicate the
sharing of a commo n situation any more than the juxtaposition of
pure exteriorities does (for example, a bench with a tree with a dog
with a passer-by).
T he question of Being and the meaning of Being has become the
question of being-with and of being-together (in the sense of the
world). Thi s is what is signified by [our] modern sense of anxiety,
which does not so much reveal a "crisis of society" but, instead, reveals
that the "sociality" or "association" of humans is an injunction
that humanity places on itself, or that it receives from the world: to
have to be only what it is and to have to, itself, be Being as such.
Thi s sort of formula is primaril y a desperate tautological abstraction—an
d this is why we are all worried. Ou r task is to break the
hard shell of this tautology. Wha t is the being-with of Being?
In one sense, this is the original situation of the West that is always
repeating itself; it is always the problem of the city, the repetition
of which, for better or worse, has already punctuated our history.
Today, this repetition produces itself as a situation in which the
two major elements [données] compose a sort of antinomy: on the
one hand, there is the exposure of the world and, on the other, the
end of representations of the world. Thi s means nothing short of a
transformation in the relation [that we name] "politico-philosophy":
it can no longer be a matter of a single community, of its essence,
closure, and sovereignty; by contrast, it can no longer be a matter
of organizing communit y according to the decrees of a sovereign
Other, or according to the telos [ fins] of a history. It can no longer
be a matter of treating sociability as a regrettable and inevitable ac-
36 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 37
cident, as a constraint that has to be managed in some way or another.
Communit y is bare, but it is imperative.
On the one side, the concept of communit y or the city is, in
every sense, diffracted. It is that which signifies the chaotic and multiform
appearance of the infranational, supranational, para-national
and, moreover, the dis-location of the "national" in general. On the
other side, the concept of communit y appears to have its own prefix
as its only content: the cum, the with deprived of substance and
connection, stripped of inferiority, subjectivity, and personality. Ei -
ther way, sovereignty is nothing. 4 1
 Sovereignty is nothing but the
com-; as such, it is always and indefinitely "to be completed," as in
com-munism or com-passion.
Thi s is not a matter of thinking the annihilation of sovereignty. It
is a matter of thinking through the following question: If sovereignty
is the grand, political term for defining communit y (its
leader or its essence) that has nothing beyond itself, with no foundation
or end but itself, what becomes of sovereignty when it is revealed
that it is nothing but a singularly plural spacing? Ho w is one
to think sovereignty as the "nothing" of the "with" that is laid bare?
At the same time, if political sovereignty has always signified the refusal
of domination (of a state by another or by a church, of a people
by something other than itself), how is one to think the bare
sovereignty of the "with" and against domination, whether this is
the domination of being-together by some other means or the domination
of togetherness by itself (by the regulation of its "automatic"
control)? In fact, one could begin to describe the present transformation
of "political space" 4 2
 as a transition toward "empire," where
empire signifies two things: (i) domination without sovereignty
(without the elaboration of such a concept); and (2) the distancing,
spacing, and plurality opposed to the concentration of interiority
required by political sovereignty. Th e question then becomes: Ho w
is one to think the spacing of empire against its domination?
In one way or another, bare sovereignty (which is, in a way, to
transcribe Batailles notion of sovereignty) presupposes that one take
a certain distance from the politico-philosophical order and from
the realm of "political philosophy." Thi s distance is not taken in order
to engage in a depoliticized thinking, but in order to engage in a
thinking, the site of which is the very constitution, imagination, and
signification of the political, which allows this thinking to retrace its
path in its retreat and beginning from this retreat. The retreat of the
political does not signify the disappearance of the political. It only
signifies the disappearance of the philosophical presupposition of the
whole politico-philosophical order, which is always an ontological
presupposition. Thi s presupposition has various forms; it can consist
in thinking Being as communit y and community as destination,
or, on the contrary, thinking Being as anterior and outside the order
of society and, as such, thinking Being as the accidental exteriority
of commerce and power. But, in this way, being-together is never
properly [brought to the fore as an explicit] theme and as the ontological
problem. Th e retreat of the political 4 3
 is the uncovering, the
ontological laying bare of being-with.
Being singular plural: in a single stroke, without punctuation,
without a mark of equivalence, implication, or sequence. A single,
continuous-discontinuous mark tracing out the entirety of the
ontological domain, being-with-itself designated as the "with" of
Being, of the singular and plural, and dealing a blow to ontology —
not only another signification but also another syntax. Th e "meaning
of Being" : not onl y as the "meaning of with, " but also, and
above all, as the "with" of meaning. Because none of these three
terms precedes or grounds the other, each designates the coessence
of the others. Thi s coessence puts essence itself in the hyphenation—"being-singular-plural"—which
is a mark of union and also
a mark of division, a mark of sharing that effaces itself, leaving each
term to its isolation andhs being-with-the-others.
From this point forward, then, the unity of an ontology must be
sought in this traction, in this drawing out, in this distancing and
spacing which is that of Being and, at the same time, that of the
singular and the plural, both in the sense that they are distinct from
one another and indistinct. In such an ontology, which is not an
"ontology of society" in the sense of a "regional ontology," but on-
3 8 Being Singular Plural
tology itself as a "sociality" or an "association" more originary than
all "society," more originary than "individuality" and every "essence
of Being. " Being is with; it is as the with of Being itself (the cobeing
of Being), so that Being does not identify itself as such44 (as Being
of the being), but shows itself [se pose], gives itself occurs, dis-poses
itself '(made event, history, and world) as its own singular plural
with. In other words, Being is not without Being, which is not another
miserable tautology as long as one understands it in the cooriginary
mode of being-with-being-itself.
According to this mode, Being is simultaneous. Just as, in order
to say Being, one must repeat it and say that "Being is," so Being is
only simultaneous with itself. Th e time of Being (the time that it
is) is this simultaneity, this coincidence that presupposes "incidence"
in general. It assumes movement, displacement, and deployment;
it assumes the originary temporal derivative of Being,
its spacing.
In one sense, this is all a matter of repeating the Aristotelian axi
om pollakôs legomenon; Being is said in many ways. But to say it
once more, according to the "with, " the "also," the "again" of a history
that repeats this excavation and drawing out [traction] of Being,
the singularity of Being is its plural. But this plurality is no
longer said in multiple ways that all begin from a presumed, single
core of meaning. The multiplicity of the said (that is, of the sayings)
belongs to Being as its constitution. Thi s occurs with each said,
which is always singular; it occurs in each said, beyond each said,
and as the multiplicity of the totality of being [l'étant en totalité].
Being, then, does not coincide with itself unless this coincidence
immediately and essentially marks itself out [se remarque] according
to the ^structure of its occurrence [l'événement] (its incidence, encounter,
angle of declination, shock, or discordant accord). Being
coincides with Being: it is the spacing and the unexpected arrival
[survenue], the unexpected spacing, of the singular plural co-.
It might be asked why it is still necessary to call this "Being, "
since the essence of it is reduced to a prefix of Being, reduced to a
co- outside of which there woul d be nothing, nothing but beings
or existences [les existants], and where this co- has none of the subBeing
Singular Plural 3 9
stance or consistency proper to "Being " as such. Thi s is, in fact,
the matter in question. Being consists in nothing other than the
existence of all existences [tous les existants]. However, this consistency
itself does not vanish in a cloud of juxtaposed beings. Wha t
I am trying to indicate by speaking of "dis-position" is neither a
simple position nor a juxtaposition. Instead, the co- defines the
unity and uniqueness of what is, in general. Wha t is to be understood
is precisely the constitution of this unique unity as co-: the
singular plural.
(Incidentally, one could show without much trouble that this is
a question that has been taken up and repeated throughout a long
tradition: in Leibniz's monadology, in all the various considerations
of the "originary division, " and, most of all, in all the various forms
of the difference between the in-itself and the for-itself. But exactly
what is important is this repetition, the concentration on and repeated
excavation of the question—which does not necessarily signify
some sort of progress or degeneration, but rather a displacement,
a fit of, or drift toward something else, toward another
philosophical posture.)
At the very least, and provisionally, one could try to say it in the
following way: it is no more a matter of an originary multiplicity
and its correlation (in the sense of the On e dividing itself in an
arch-dialectical manner, or in the sense of the atoms' relationship to
the clinamen) than it is a matter of an originary unity and its division.
In either case, one must think an anteriority of the origin according
to some event that happens to it unexpectedly (even if that
event originates within it). It is necessary, then, to think plural unity
originarily. Thi s is indeed the place to think the plural as such.
In Latin, plus is comparable to multus. It is not "numerous"; it is
"more." It is an increase or excess of origin in the origin. To put it
in terms of the models just alluded to above: the On e is more than
one; it is not that "it divides itself," rather it is that one equals more
than one, because "one" cannot be counted without counting more
than one. Or , in the atomist model, there are atoms plus the clinamen.
But the clinamen is not something else, another element outside
of the atoms; it is not in addition to them; it is the "more" of 
4 0 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 4i
their exposition. Being many, they cannot but incline or decline;
they are ones in relation to others. Immobilit y or the parallel fall
[la chute parallel] woul d do away with this exposition, woul d return
to the pure position and not distinguish itself from the One -
purely-one (or, in other words, from the Other). The On e as purely
one is less than one; it cannot be, be put in place, or counted. On e
as properly one is always more than one. It is an excess of unity; it
is one-with-one, where its Being in itself is copresent.
T h e co- itself and as such, the copresence of Being, is not presentable
as that Being which "is, " since it is only in the distancing.
It is unpresentable, not because it occupies the most withdrawn
a nd mysterious region of Being, the region of nothingness, but
quite simpl y because it is not subject to a logic of presentation.
Neither present nor to be presented (nor, as a result, "unpresentable"
in the strict sense), the "with" is the (singular plural) condition
of presence in general [understood] as copresence. Thi s copresence
is neither a presence withdrawn into absence nor a presence
in itself or for itself.
It is also not pure presence to, to itself to others, or to the world. In
fact, none of these modes of presence can take place, insofar as
presence takes place, unless copresence first takes place. As such,
no single subject could even designate itself ana relate itself to itself
as subject. In the most classical sense of the term, a subject not only
assumes its own distinction from the object of its representation or
mastery, it also assumes its own distinction from other subjects. It is
possible, then, to distinguish the ipseity of these other subjects
(which is to say, the aesity) from [d'avec] its own source of representation
or mastery. Therefore, the with is the supposition of the
"self" in general. But this supposition is no longer subjacent to the
self, in the sense of an infinite self-presupposition of sub-jective substance.
As its syntactic function indicates, "with" is the pre-position
of the position in general; thus, it constitutes its dis-position.
T h e "self," of the "self" in general, takes place with before taki
ng place as itself and/or as the other. Thi s "aseity" of the self is anterior
to the same and to the other and, therefore, anterior to the
distinction between a consciousness and its world. Before phenomenological
intentionality and the constitution of the ego, but also
before thinglike consistency as such, there is co-originarity according
to the with. Properly speaking, then, there is no anteriority: cooriginarity
is the most general structure of all con-sistency, all constitution,
and all con-sciousness.
[Thi s is] presence-with: with as the exclusive mode of beingpresent,
such that being present and the present of Being does not
coincide in itself, or wit h itself, inasmuch as it coincides or "falls
with" ["tombe avec"] the other presence, which itself obeys the
same law. Being-many-together is the originary situation; it is even
what defines a "situation" in general. Therefore, an originary or
transcendental "with" demands, with a palpable urgency, to be disentangled
and articulated for itself. But one of the greatest difficulties
of the concept of the with is that there is no "getting back
to" or "up to" [remonter] this "originary" or "transcendental" position;
the with is strictly contemporaneous with all existence, as it
is with all thinking.
Coexistence
It is no accident that communism and socialism of all sorts are
responsible for an essential part of the set of expectations that belong
to the modern world. The y are responsible for the hope of a
rupture and innovation from which there is no turning back; it is
the hope for a revolution, a re-creation of the world. It becomes
clearer to us every day that it is not enough to stigmatize the errors,
lies, and crimes of "existing versions of socialism" as "national socialisms."
Represented primaril y in the assured and demanding
consciousness of "human rights," moral and political condemnation
always runs the risk of using its incontestable legitimacy to
mask another legitimacy, which was and still is that of an irreducible
demand that we be capable of saying "we," that we be capable
of saying we to ourselves (saying it about ourselves to one another),
beginning from the point where no leader or Go d can say
it for us. Thi s demand is in no way secondary, and this is what
gives it its terrible power to unleash, subvert, resist, or sweep away. 
42 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 43
Because not being able to say "we" is what plunges every "I, "
whether individual or collective, into the insanity where he cannot
say "I " either. To want to say "we" is not at all sentimental, not at
all familial or "communitarian. " It is existence reclaiming its due
or its condition: coexistence. 4 5
If the "socialist" hope as such had to be understood as an illusion
or a trick, then the meaning that carried it along, the meaning which
violently manifested itself through it, was all the better illuminated.
It was not a question of substituting the rule of these people for the
rule of those people, substituting the domination of the "masses" for
that of their masters. It was a question of substituting a shared sovereignty
for domination in general, a sovereignty of everyone and of
each one, but a sovereignty understood not as the exercise of power
and domination but as a praxis of meaning. The traditional sovereignties
(the theologico-political order) did not lose power (which
only ever shifts from place to place), but lost the possibility of making
sense. As a result, meaning itself—that is, the "we"—demanded
its due, if one can talk in these ways. Wha t we must remember is
that what Mar x understood by alienation was both the alienation of
the proletariat and the alienation of the bourgeoisie (indeed, an
alienation of the "we," but one that was asymmetrical, unequal), and
that this is primarily an alienation of meaning. But Mar x still left the
question of the appropriation or reappropriation of meaning in suspense—for
example, by leaving open the question of what must be
understood by "free labor." In time, this suspense opened onto the
demand for another ontology of the "generic being" of humanity as
"essentially social": a co-ontology.
Thus , the disenchantment or disarray of our fin de siecle cannot
content itself with mournin g the passing of socialist visions, any
more than it can comfort itself by replacing them with a naive collection
of new "communitarian" themes. Thi s disenchantment
does something else; it designates our major anxiety, the one that
makes "us" what "we" are today; we exist as the anxiety of "social
Being" as such, where "sociality" and "society" are concepts plainly
inadequate to its essence. Thi s is why "social Being" becomes, in a
way that is at first infinitely poor and problematic, "being-incommon,
" "being-many," "being-with-one-another," exposing the
"with" as the category that still has no status or use, but from which
we receive everything that makes us think and everything that gives
"us" to thinking.
At the very moment when there is no longer a "command post"
from which a "socialist vision" could put forward a subject of history
or politics, or, in an even broader sense, when there is no
longer a "city" or "society" out of which a regulative figure could
be modeled, at this moment being-many, shielded from all intuition,
from all representation or imagination, presents itself with
all the acuity of its question, with all the sovereignty of its demand.
Thi s question and demand belong to the constitution of beingmany
as such and, therefore, belong to the constitution of plurality
in Being. It is here that the concept of coexistence is sharpened and
made more complex. It is remarkable that this term still serves to
designate a regime or state more or less imposed by extrinsic circumstances.
It is a notion whose tone often oscillates between in -
difference and resignation, or even between cohabitation and contamination.
Always subject to weak and unpleasant connotations,
coexistence designates a constraint, or at best an acceptable concomitance,
but not what is at stake in being or essence, unless in
the form of an insurmountable aporia with which one can only negotiate.
It is an "unsociable sociability" that probably woul d not
even satisfy Kant himself, now that its paradox no longer serves as
a guide to any thinking through of the perfectability of peoples,
but rather serves as a pudendum to the cynicism known as "liberalism.
" But liberalism is showing all the signs of exhaustion—a t
the very least, exhaustion in terms of meaning—since , at the collapse
of "socialism," it can only respond by designating the "social"
and the "sociological" as relatively autonomous spheres of action
and knowledge. Repairing fractures or describing structures wil l
never be able to take the place of a thinking of Being itself as beingtogether.
The liberal response to the collapse of communism, then,
involves nothing more than an eager repression of the very question
of being-in-common (which so-called real communis m repressed
under a commo n Being). No w that this particular ques-
44 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 45
tion is the only one to have come to light, it will not leave us alone;
it wil l not stop cropping up again, since "we" are in question in it.
Wha t comes to light, then, is not a "social" or "communitarian
dimension" added onto a primitive individual given, even if it were
to occur as an essential and determining addition. (Just think of
the numerous circumstances of ordinary discourse in which this order
is imposed on us: first the individual, then the group; first the
one, then the others; first the rights-bearing subject; then real relationships;
first "individua l psychology," then "collective psychology";
and above all, first a "subject," then "intersubjectivity"—as
they astonishingly persist in saying.) It is not even a question of a
sociality or alterity that woul d come to cut across, complicate, put
into play, or alter the principle o f the subject understood as solus
ipse. It is something else and still more. It does not so much determine
the principle of the ipse, whatever this may be ("individual "
or "collective," insofar as one can speak in these ways), as it codetermines
it with the plurality o f ipses, each one o f which is cooriginary
and coessential to the world, to a world which from this
point on defines a coexistence that must be understood in a stillunheard-of
sense, exactly because it does not take place "in " the
world, but instead forms the essence and the structure of the world.
It is not a nearness [voisinage] or communit y of ipses, but a coipseity:
this is what comes to light, but as an enigma with which
our thinking is confronted.
In twentieth-century philosophy, the Heideggerian ontology of
Mitsein is still no more than a sketch (I wil l come back to this).
Husserlian coexistence or communit y retains its status as correlative
to ego, where "solipsistic" egology remains first philosophy.
Outside philosophy, it is remarkable that it is not social and political
theory which has most closely approached the enigma of a coipseity
(and as a result, the enigma of a hetero-ipseity). Rather what
has come closest to co-ipseity is, on the one hand, an ethnology
that ends up being more engaged with the phenomena of comembership4
6
 and, on the other, the Freud of the second model, the triple
determination of which is constituted according to a mechanical
coexistence (what are the "id " and "superego" if not being-with, if
not the coconstitution of the "ego"?). The same could be said for
the Lacanian theory of "significance," insofar as it does not bring
about a return to signification, but a mutually instituting correlation
of "subjects" (to the extent that the Lacanian "Other " is anything
but an "Other" : such a name is a theologizing residue that
serves to designate "sociation").
However, it is just as remarkable that psychoanalysis still represents
the most individual practice there is, and, moreover, represents
a sort of paradoxical privatization of something the very law
of which is "relation" in every sense of the word. Curiously, what
happens here may be the same as what happens in the economy:
"subjects" of exchange are the most rigorously co-originary; and
this mutual originarity vanishes in the unequal appropriation of exchange,
such that this coexistence vanishes in a strong sense. It is
no accident, then, if Mar x and Freud represent two different, yet
symmetrical, projects; each puts forth an indissociably theoretical
and practical attempt to get at "being-in-common" as a critical
point (of disorder in one, of sickness in the other) of history or civilization.
If a brief summar y is allowed here, I woul d say that, because
there has been no "socialist economy" (but onl y state capitalism),
just as there has been no "collective psychoanalysis" (unless
by means of a projection of an individua l model), there lies between
economics and psychoanalysis the bare space of a "beingtogether"
whose theologico-political presupposition has been exhausted,
and which reappears onl y in reactive spurts. Thi s space
has become global, which does not simply mean it has spread out
over the entire surface of the planet and beyond, but that it has
emerged as the surface of what is at play in the depths: the essence
of being-with.
Thi s process of globalization results in a coalescence, a concentration
that seems to be both uniform and anonymous and, at the
same time, an atomization, a codispersion that seems to be given
over to idiocy. Thi s is idiocy in the sense of the Greek idiotes, meaning
private or ignorant person, as well as idiocy in the modern sense
of stupid impenetrability ("private property" as deprived of meaning).
It seems, then, that the dialectic Mar x thought he foresaw un-
4 6 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 47
folding appears to be definitively blocked, the dialectic of an "individual
" appropriation that would mediate within itself the moments
of private property and collective property. At the same time, this
seems to confirm definitively the Freudian contrast between a possible
cure of the nervous individua l and the incurable malaise of
civilization. Thi s dialectic, this contrast, and their uncommunica -
tive and paralyzing confrontation indicate the knot of questions,
expectations, and anxieties of an epoch. Ho w can being-together
appropriate itself as such, when it is left up to itself to be what it is,
when it is presented in a formulation that is stripped down and has
no substantial presupposition or, in other terms, lacks symboli c
identification? Wha t becomes of being-with when the with no
longer appears as a corn-position, but only as a dis-position?
H o w are we to understand the co- as dis-? Whic h one o f these is
the "as such" of Being that exposes it as its own sharing and which
expresses that, as Being, it is between Being and Being itself? An d
moreover, what is it that brings together in Being that "as" = "as
such" and "as" = "similarly"? Each time, Being as such is Being as
the Being of a being, and it is this each time, similarly. Wha t is it
that makes Being as such a being-similar which circulates from bei
ng to being and which, thereby, implies the disparity, discontinuity,
and simultaneity required for gauging a "resemblance"? Wha t
is this com-plication (co-implication and complexity) by which humans
exhibit—withi n the discourse of the similar and the dissimilar,
a discourse which is very difficult and puts "humanity" as such
into play— a certain (dis)similarity of Being that crosses through
all being? Ho w can Being as such be anything other than the
(dis)similarity of being in its simultaneity?
To say that this question is an ontological question—o r even
that it is the ontological question, absolutely—does not mean we
have to leave the realm of economics and sickness, any more than
we have to abandon the order of praxis. On the contrary, as I have
already said, this question is simply that of what is called "capital,"
and even the question of "history" and "politics." "Ontology " does
not occur at a level reserved for principles , a level that is with -
drawn, speculative, and altogether abstract. Its name means the
thinking of existence. An d today, the situation of ontology signifies
the following: to think existence at the height of this challenge
to thinking that is globalness [mondialité] as such (which is designated
as "capital," "(de-)Westernization, " "technology," "rupture
of history," and so forth).
Conditions of Critique
T he retreat of the political and the religious, or of the theologicopolitical,
means the retreat of every space, form, or screen into
which or onto which a figure of communit y could be projected. At
the right time, then, the question has to be posed as to whether
being-together can do without a figure and, as a result, without an
identification, if the whole of its "substance" consists only in its
spacing. But this question cannot be articulated in a completely appropriate
way until the full extent of the withdrawal of its figure
and identity has been grasped. Today, when thinking moves too
quickly, when it is fearful and reactionary, it declares that the most
commonl y recognized forms of identification are indispensable and
claim that the destinies proper to them are used up or perverted,
whether it be: "people," "nation, " "church, " or "culture," not to
mention the confused "ethnicity" or the tortuous "roots." There is a
whole panorama of membership and property, here, whose political
and philosophical history has yet to be written4 7 : it is the history of
the representation-of-self as the determining element of an originary
concept of society.
T he retreat presents itself in two ways at once: on the one hand,
the theologico-political withdraws into the realm of law4 8 ; on the
other, it withdraws into a self-representation that no longer refers
to an origin, but only to the void of its own specularity.
Passing into the realm of law effectively divides the "political "
in two: there is the formal abstraction of the law, which undoubtedly
"does right " by every particularity and every relation, but
without giving this right any meaning other than itself; and then
the reality of the relation of forces—whether economic, technical,
or the forces of passion—stands out in a pronounced and au-
4 8 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 49
tonomous fashion, that is, unless law itself undertakes to set itself
up as an origin or foundation, in the form of an absolute Law [la
Loi}. (It is here that psychoanalysis seeks, in a remarkable way, to
facilitate a substantial and authoritarian vision of society.) Law as
such is necessarily the Law of an Other, or the Law as Other. Th e
Othe r implies its nonrepresentability. In a theological realm, this
can give rise to an "interdiction of representation" that supposes
the sacred nature of the Othe r and, along with it, an entire econo
my of the sacred, sacrificial, hierarchical, and heirophantic, even
where the theophany and theology are negative. Access to Presence,
and even to a "super-presence," is always preserved. But
within an atheological realm, this interdiction becomes a denial of
representation; the alterity of the law either retrieves, represses, or
denies its origin, and ends in the singular presence of each one to
the others. In this sense, something "unrepresentable" or "unfigurable"
runs the risk of revealing itself as completely oppressive and
terrifying, if not terrorist, open to the anguish of an originary Lack.
In contrast, the "figure" proves itself to be capable of opening onto
the "with" as its border, the very limit of its outline.
( O f course, these two "realms" do not just follow one another in
a history. The y are each and both implicated in the interdiction
against representation and/or the anxiety about it, that is, in the
question about gaining access to the origin(s), a question about its
possibility/impossibility.)
So it is not so much a question of denying law itself, it is more a
question of "doing right" by the singular plural of the origin. As a
result, it is a matter of questioning law about what we might call
its "originary anarchy" or the very origin of the law in what is "by
all rights without any right": existence unjustifiable as such. To be
sure, the derivation or deduction of law from the unjustifiability of
existence is not immediate or obvious. In essence, it may even escape
the process of a "deduction" altogether. But this remains to be
thought; in the meantime, law without ontology reabsorbs Being
and its meaning into the empty truth of Law. To assume that politics
is entirely a question of "human rights" is also to assume surreptitiously
that "man" is entirely a question of the Other. Thi s is
what is most often at work in any call to "ethics": a transcendental
unpresentability of that most concrete presence.
On the other side of this retreat, however, it is representation that
triumphs, absorbing entirely both the transcendental and the concrete.
Wha t does the impoverished word "society" now say when it
is emptied of all "sociation" or "association," not to mention emptied
of the "communities" and "fraternities" that constitute our im -
ages of primitive life (the construction of which has, in general,
shown itself to be fantastical)? Wha t is left seems to be nothing
more than this "society" face to face with itself, being-social itself
defined by this game of mirrors, and losing itself in the scintillating
play of light and images. It is not a matter of the Othe r or others,
but of a singular plural that is subsumed by means of its own
curiosity about itself, subsumed within a generalized equivalence of
all the representations of itself that it gives itself to consume.
Thi s is called "the spectacular-market society" or "the society of
the spectacle." Thi s is the post-Marxis t or meta-Marxis t intuition
of Situationism. It thinks of "commodit y fetishism," or the domination
of capital, as being accomplished by the general commodification
of fetishes, in the production and consumption of material
and symbolic "goods" that all have the character of being an im -
age, illusion, or appearance (and where, in fact, democratic rights
tops the list of such "goods"). Th e "good," of which the "spectacle"
is the general illusion, is only the real self-appropriation of social
Being. An order structured according to a visible division of society,
the justification for which is found only in an invisible beyond (religion,
ideal), is succeeded by an immanent order that, like visibility
itself, imitates its self-appropriation at every point. Th e society
of the spectacle is that society which achieves alienation by an
imaginary appropriation of real appropriation. Th e secret of the il -
lusion consists in the fact that real appropriation must consist only
in a free, self-creating imagination that is indissociably individual
and collective: the spectacular commodit y in all its forms consists
essentially in the imagery [imaginaire} that it sells as a replacement
for authentic imagination. As such, then, universal commerce is
constituted by a representation wherein existence is both an in -
5 0 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 5 '
vention and a self-appropriating event. A subject of representation,
that is, a subject reduced to the sum or flux of representations
which it purchases, is the placeholder that functions as a subject of
Being and history. (Thi s is why the reply to the spectacle is formulated
as the free creation of the "situation": the appropriating
event abruptly removed from the logic of the spectacle. Thi s is also
w hy Situationism, the offspring of several artistic movements,
refers to a paradigm of artistic creation that is nonaesthetic or
maybe even antiaesthetic.)
In this way, Situationism (which I do not really want to go into
here, but want to treat as a symptom4 9 ), and some of its offshoots
into various sorts of analyses concerning the self-simulation and selfcontrol
of our society, understands that Marxis m missed the mo -
ment of symbolic appropriation by confusing it with that of productive
appropriation, or even by thinking that such productive
appropriation must be self-producing and, thereby, move beyond itself
into symbolic appropriation: the self-suppression of capital as the
integral reappropriation of Being as communa l existence. Mor e
specifically, they understand that it is this sort of self-surpassing that
does indeed take place. But it does not take place by bringing about
an appropriation of being-in-common understood as symbolic Being
(taking symbol in the strong sense of being a bond of recognition, an
ontological instance of the "in-common, " like Marx's bond of "free
labor" where everyone produces himself or herself as a subject with
others and as a subject o/^being-with-one-another). Instead, this selfsurpassing
takes place as the symbolization of production itself,
which allows for coexistence only in the form of the technical or economi
c co-ordination of the various commodit y networks.
Situationism thus understands that the "human sciences" have
come to constitute this self-symbolization of society, which is not,
in fact, a symbolization but onl y a representation and, more precisely,
the representation of a subject that has no subjectivity other
than this representation itself. In fact, it turns out to be quite clear
that the "human sciences" (even in their various critical capacities,
where these capacities do not turn into an insidious form of "super-representation")
are the real strength behind what is know n
as the generalized "spectacle." Here, the gravity of the question
concerning the "media" comes to the fore. "Mediatization" does
not depend on overblown hype, which is nothing new in itself; nor
does it depend on technological or economi c power as such. It
depends primaril y on the fact that a society gives itself its representation
in the guise of symbolism. Thi s is also why it has such a
capacity for absorbing its ow n critique and its ow n rebellious,
ironic, or distanced presentations. A sort of general psychosociology
takes the place of the presupposition of a figure or identity of
being-social.
In this respect, Situationism is not wrong to discern misery at the
very heart of abundance, a symbolic misery that does not exclude
sustained material misery and certain people's deprivation, in particular
the misery of muc h of the southern hemisphere. . . . Th e
misery of the "spectacle" names that coexistence where the co- ends
up referring to nothing by which existence could symbolize itself
according to itself. Tha t is, at the very moment when it exposes itself
and proves to be the entire property of Being, it is nothing by
which existence says itself as such, nothing by which it makes sense
of Being. At that very moment when the only other thing that is
given along with existence is existence-with as the space for deployment
and appropriation, the co- is nothing that can make sense.
Being-together is defined by being-together-at-the-spectacle, and
this being-together understands itself as an inversion of the representation
of itself, which it believes to be capable of giving itself as
originary (and lost): the Greek city assembled in communit y at the
theater of its own myths. An example of today's response might be
the following advertisement, which itself constitutes a spectacular
and disturbing recuperation of the Situationist critique: "Football
makes all other art forms insignificant." 5 0
In any case, it is precisely this indefinite capacity for recuperating
the Situationist critique that demands attention. The denunciation
of mere appearance effortlessly moves within mere appearance, because
it has no other way of designating what is proper—tha t is,
nonappearance—except as the obscure opposite of the spectacle.
Since the spectacle occupies all of space, its opposite can only make 
5 2 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 53
itself known as the inappropriable secret of an originary property
hidden beneath appearances. Thi s is why the opposite of deceitful
"imagery" is creative "imagination, " the mode l for which is still
something like the Romanti c genius. According to such a model,
the artist plays the part of the productive-subject, but still accordi
ng to the structure of an ontological presupposition that involves
no specific interrogation of the "common" or "in-common" of Being,
nor of the meaning of Being that is in question.
We must, therefore, understand how this version of Marxis t critique,
and all the versions of critical thinking inaugurated by Mar x
(whether they be the more "leftist" versions or the more "sociological"
ones, those of Bataille or the Frankfurt School, and so on), in
some way obscured, in statu nascendi, the correctness of its own in -
tuition. Thi s was the intuition of society exposed to itself, establishing
its being-social under no other horizon than itself—that is, without
a horizon of Meaning in which to relate being-together as such,
without an instance of corn-position as society's dis-position splayed
open and laid bare. But this very intuition is interpreted only as the
reign of appearance, as the substitution of the spectacle for authentic
presence; appearance is understood, here, in the most classical
way, namely, as "mere appearance" (surface, secondary exteriority,
inessential shadow), and even as "false appearance" (semblance, deceptive
imitation). In this respect, critique remains obedient to the
most trenchant and "metaphysical" tradition of philosophy, "metaphysical"
in the Nietzschean sense: the refusal to consider an order
of "appearances," preferring, instead, authentic reality (deep, living,
originary—and always on the order of the Other).
Withi n this tradition, it is over and against the demand of intelligible
reality that sensible appearance has been constituted and disregarded
all in the same gesture, just as plurality has been constituted
and disregarded for the sake of the requirement of unity.
Likewise, public appearance has been constituted and disregarded
in favor of an interior and theoretical reality (think of Plato's Thaïes,
w ho was inept in the affairs of the city), and when authentic reality
was demanded in the political or communitarian order, it happened
at the cost of relegating the political or the communitarian to interiority,
and at the cost of simply disregarding "social" exteriority
(the sphere of the exteriority of needs and exchanges, the sphere of
worldly appearance, and so forth). Th e Situationist critique continued
to refer essentially to something like an internal truth (designated,
for example, by the name "desire" or "imagination"), the
whole concept of which is that of a subjective appropriation of "true
life," itself thought of as origin proper, as self-deployment and selfsatisfaction.
In this, Situationism demonstrates the nearly constant
characteristic of the modern critique of exteriority, appearance, and
social alienation—at least, since Rousseau.
I certainly do not want to suggest by this that the critique of
alienation, illusion, or ideology is ineffectual. But we do have to
wonder to what extent the critique of alienation is itself in danger
of remaining subject to another, symmetrical alienation of the sort
that I am trying to point out by referring to different species of the
Other, which is still to say the Same or the Oneself of a unique,
exclusive, and egoistic appropriation, however ego is to be understood
(whether generic, communitarian, or individual). On another
level, one could say that this is a more or less explicit reference
to "nature": universal nature, human nature, natural to each
person or natural to a people. Th e idea of nature retains within itself
the dominant theme of self-sufficiency, of self-organization,
and of a process oriented toward an end state. Thi s sort of nature is
at a remove from exteriority and contingency, which, in other
places, are marks of a "nature" that is "outside" us, to which we are
exposed and without which our exposition woul d not take place.
Similarly, the ego is from the very start removed from that exteriority
and contingency without which it is impossible to expose it
as ego.
Both the theory and praxis of critique demonstrate that, from
now on, critique absolutely needs to rest on some principle other
than that of the ontology of the Othe r and the Same: it needs an
ontology of being-with-one-another, and this ontology must support
both the sphere of "nature" and sphere of "history," as well as
both the "human" and the "nonhuman" ; it must be an ontology
for the world, for everyone—and if I can be so bold, it has to be 
54 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 55
an ontology for each and every one and for the world "as a totality,"
and nothing short of the whole world, since this is all there is
(but, in this way, there is all).
As the last great form of radical critique, Situationism was no
stranger to this necessity. Despite everything, its critique worked
itself out while giving little play to [the practice of] referring society
to a mode l of some sort. Thi s is undoubtedly where its rupture
wit h various Marxisms was most decisive and where, wit h some
others and partly in Marx's name, it offered one of the first and
most virulent critiques of what was until just recently called "real"
socialism and also social-democracies. As a result, Situationism has
brought to light rather well, although not to its fullest extent, the
theme of referring society back to itself. Th e "society of the spectacle"
is both a denunciation (of the generalized spectacle-market)
a nd an affirmation of society facing itself and, maybe even more
so, the affirmation of society as exposed to itself and only to itself.
We must, therefore, pose the following two questions at the same
time:
1. Ho w can one know in what way and just how far critique —
both revolutionary critique, including its most recent manifestations,
and also so-called reformist critique—remains paradoxically
and unconsciously subject to a classical mode l in which reality is
opposed to appearance and unit y is opposed to plurality? (Thi s
model assumes that a certain Nietzschean lesson is constantly misunderstood
or avoided within the critical tradition and, at the same
time, that the whole question of what can be called "art" from the
point of view of social critique remains more or less untouched.)
In other words, to what extent do "critical " thinking and the "critical
" attitude as such entail this subjection (if "critique" always presupposes
the possibility of unveiling the intelligibility of the real),
and what other attitude is necessary, where an attitude of resignation
is out of the question?
2. Ho w can one know if the "spectacle" is, in one way or another,
a constitutive dimension of society? Tha t is, how can one know if
what is called "social relation" can be thought of according to
something other than the symbolic order, and if the symbolic order
can, in turn, be thought of in some way other than according
to the order of "imagination" or "figuration," all of which indicates
the necessity of thinking all these terms in a new way? Onc e again,
"art" would come into play, but only according to a thinking that is
quite different from asking the trivial question about "art and society"
and, at the same time, according to a wholly different thinki
ng of "art" itself, and of what we might include under the headi
ng "critical art."
These questions serve as the programmati c heading of some
fuller inquiry. I wil l not take them both on at once, because each
one is too enormous in itself. I wil l only attempt to open some different
ways of approaching them.
At the very heart of the tradition, it must be said that "intelligible
reality" can only be the reality of the sensible as such—an d that
the "intelligible reality" of the communit y can only be the reality
of being-in-common as such. Thi s is why reduction to or subsumption
in intelligibility (Idea, Concept, Subject) regularly comes into
tension with its own requirement that it provide an intelligibility
of the sensible that occurs within sensibility, for it and right at [à
même] it; this is often so forceful an opposition that it leads to a
rupture, where sensible intelligibility either breaks apart or dissolves
itself altogether.
Wha t comes to us today is the demand to give the meaning of
being-in-common according to what it is—in- common or with—
and not according to a Being or an essence of the common . As
such, it is the demand to give the meaning of being-with right at
the with, and in a "making sense with" ["faire-sans-avec"] (a praxis
of meaning-with [sens-avec]) where the opposition of a Meanin g
(horizon, history, community ) and a simple "with" (spacing, exteriority,
disparity) woul d dissolve or break apart. In short, it is becoming
a matter of urgency to know whether social critique is to
be made by virtue of a presupposition that is not at all social (an
ontology of Being- tout-court, as it were) or by virtue of an ontology
of being-in-common, that is, of the plural singular essence of
Being. Thi s is why the subject of "ontology" first of all entails the
critical examination of the conditions of critique in general. 
56 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 57
Co-appearing
It might be, then, that the current situation of "social Being" has
to be understood in some other way than by starting from the
schema of an immense, spectacular self-consumption, a schema
where the truth of communit y is dissolved and engulfed—whether
communit y [is understood] as subject or as occurring between subjects.
If onl y we made the effort to decipher it in a new way, it
might be that the phenomenon of the generalized "spectacle,"
along with what we call the "tele-global dimension, " which accompanies
it and is cosubstantial with it, woul d reveal something
else altogether. Wha t is of primary importance in this is to avoid
presupposing that the subject of "social Being" or the subject of Being
tout court is already established.
B ut this cannot simpl y be a matter of the classic gesture of
wanting to begin without presuppositions (which always assumes
that this desire [volonté] itself is not already the whole presupposition).
It is a matter of rigorously thinkin g what Being-withoutpresuppositions-about-itself
means, which is, once again, the "creation
of the world. " In a general way, indeed in an absolutely
general way, the primordia l requirement of ontology or first philosophy
must now be that Being not be presupposed in any way or
in any respect, and, more precisely, that every presupposition of Being
must consist in its nonpresupposition.
Being cannot be pre-sup-posed [pré-sup-posé] if it is only the Bei
ng of what exists, and is not itself some other existence that is previous
or subjacent to existence by which existence exists. For existence
exists in the plural, singularly plural. As a result, the most
formal and fundamental requirement [of ontology] is that "Being"
cannot even be assumed to be the simple singular that the name
seems to indicate. Its being singular is plural in its very Being. It
follows, then, that not only must being-with-one-another not be understood
starting from the presupposition of being-one, but on the contrary,
being-one (Being as such, complete Being or ens realissimum)
can only be understood by starting from being-with-one-another. That
question which we still call a "question of social Being " must, in
fact, constitute the ontological question.
If one really understands the necessity of this groundless presupposition,
one woul d also have to try to say the following: if the
situation of being-social is not that of a spectacular self-alienation
that presupposes a lost or dissimulated "real presence," neither is it
that of a general communicationa l arrangement, whic h presupposes
a "rational subject" of communication. Thi s does not mean
that there is nothing to the illusions of spectacular self-alienation
or to the rationality of a general communicationa l arrangement,
but it does mean that "real presence" and "rationality" can only be
thought or evaluated by beginning from something else; and they
cannot themselves constitute the groundless presupposition. If left
to itself, as a sort of grand, hermeneutical antinomy of the modern
world (and one that is clearly at work everywhere), this contrary
double form of the "[illusory] spectacle" and "[rational] communication"
could even switch their predicates around, such that the
"spectacle" would be nothing other than "communication" and vice
versa. Thi s chiasma or circle worries us in our confused and anxiety-ridden
awareness that society just "turns round and around, "
without substance, without foundation, without end.
In fact, it might be that what is happening to us is just another
sort of "Copernican revolution, " not of the cosmological system,
or of the relation of subject and object, but rather of "social Being"
revolving [tournant] around itself or turning on itself, and no
longer revolving around something else (Subject, Other , or Same).
Wha t happens to us, then, is the stripping bare [mis à nu] of social
reality, the very reality of being-social in , by, and as the symbolicity
that constitutes it, where "spectacle," "communication, "
"commodity, " and "technology" woul d be different figures of this
symbolicity. These are, however, perverse figures that still have to
be thought.
It is still necessary to understand what this word "symbolic "
means. Th e proper value of symbolism is in making a symbol, that
is, in making a connection or a joining, 5 1
 and in giving a face [ fig-
5 8 Being Singular Plural
ure] to this liaison by making an image. Insofar as the relation is
imagined [se représente], and because the relation as such is nothi
ng other than its own representation, the symbolic is what is real
in such a relation. By no means, however, is such a relation the representation
of something that is real (in the secondary, mimeti c
sense of representation), but the relation is, and is nothing other
than, what is real in the representation—it s effectiveness and its
efficacy. (The paradigm for this is "I love you" or, perhaps more
originally, "I am addressing myself to you.")
In this respect, it is important to emphasize that the symboli c
a nd the imaginary are far from opposites. Bu t the way in which
they are not opposites is even contrary to how the commo n way of
speaking [vulgate] conflates the image (understood as manifestation
and recognition) with the simulacrum (understood as a captivating
and mystifying hypostasis). Th e simple, or simplistic, critique
of "the image" (and of the "civilization of images"), which has
become a sort of ideological trope in theories of the "spectacle" and
in theories of "communication, " i s nothing but the mythi c and
mystifying effect of the frantic desire for a "pure" symbolization
(and a symptomatic manifestation of the weakness of "critique" in
general). The sole criterion of symbolization is not the exclusion or
debasement of the image, but instead the capacity for allowing a
certain play, in and by the image-symbol, with the joining, the distancing,
the opened interval that articulates it as sym-bol: this word
simply means "put with" (the Greek sun equals the Latin cum), so
that the dimension, space, and nature of the "with" are in play here.
Therefore, the "symbolic" is not simply an aspect of being-social:
on the one hand, it is this Being itself; on the other hand, the symbolic
does not take place without (re)presentation, the (representation
of one another [des uns aux autres] according to which they
are with one another [les-uns-avec-les-autres].
If I speak of "social" reality's being stripped bare as its symbolicity,
then I am talking about "society" uncovered, society no longer
being the appearance of only itself, society no longer reduced to a
sort of background "symbolizing" (in the ordinary sense) nothing
(no community , no mystical body). I am talking about society
Being Singular Plural 59
making a symbol of itself, society making its appearance by facing
[ face à] itself in order to be all that it is and all that it has to be. In
this way, being-social is not reduced to any assumption of an interior
or superior unity. Its unit y is wholl y symbolic; it is wholl y of
the with. Being-social is Being that is by appearing in the face of
itself, faced with itself: it is co-appearing [com-parution].
Co-appearing does not simpl y signify that subjects appear together.
In that case (which is the "social contract"), it woul d still
need to be asked from where it is that they "appear," from which
remote depth do they come into being-social as such, from what
origin. We must also wonder why they appear "together" ["ensemble"]
and for what other depth they are destined, destined "all together"
or "further-on [outre] together." Either the predicate "together"
is onl y a qualification that is extrinsic to subjects, which
does not belong to the appearance of each one as such, but designates
a pure, indifferent juxtaposition, or it adds a particular quality,
one granted a meaning of its own that must be worked out for
all subjects "together" and as "together." These two questions lead
straight to the dead ends of a metaphysics—and its politics—i n
which (1) social co-appearance is only ever thought of as a transitory
epiphenomenon, and (2) society itself is thought of as a step
in a process that always leads either to the hypostasis of togetherness
or the commo n (community, communion), or to the hypostasis
of the individual.
In either case, one comes to a dead end because being-social as
such—o r again, what might be called the association [sociation] of
Being—is instrumentalized, related to something other than itself.
On this account, the essence of the "social" is not itself "social." As
a result, it is never presentable under the heading of the "social,"
but only under the heading of either a simple, extrinsic, and transitory
"association," or of a transsocial presupposition, the unitary
entelechy of commo n Being—whic h are both ways to repress and
foreclose the problem of "association."
T h e very meaning of the word "together," just like the meaning 
6o Being Singular Plural
of the word "with, " seems to oscillate indefinitely between two
meanings, without ever coming to a point of equilibrium: it is either
the "together" of juxtaposition partes extra partes, isolated and
unrelated parts, or the "together" of gathering totum intra totum, a
unified totality [unitotalité] where the relation surpasses itself in
being pure. But it is clear from this that the resources found in the
term are situated precisely on the point of equilibrium between the
two meanings: "together" is neither extra nor intra. In fact, the pure
outside, like the pure inside, renders all sorts of togetherness im -
possible. The y both suppose a unique and isolated pure substance,
but pure in such a way that one cannot even say "isolated," exactly
because one would be deprived of all relation with it. As such, then,
G o d is not together with anything or anyone, but is—a t least in
Spinoza and Leibniz , although in different, but equally exemplary,
ways—the togetherness or being-together of all that is: Go d is not
"God." 5 2
Togetherness and being-together are not equivalent. (On the contrary,
the equivocation between the two makes the status of the
gods of onto-theology uncertain. [Whether it is a matter of] pantheism,
panentheism, polytheism, monotheism, atheism, deism,
and so on, [are such gods] representable or unrepresentable? [Do
they] ground representation or remove it? Or [might they] even be
representation itself?) Togetherness, in the sense of being a substantive
entity, is a collection (as in the theory of togethernesses [ensembles]).
Collection assumes a regrouping that is exterior and in -
different to the being-together ("in common" ) of the objects of the
collection. In a general way, the themes and practices of the "collective"
or of "collectivism" move in this register. It could be said,
then, that the ontological togetherness which we must think through
is never substantive; it is always the adverb of a being-together. But
this adverb is not a predicate of "Being" ; it brings to it no particular
and supplementary qualification. Like all adverbs, it modifies or
modalizes the verb, but here modalization is of the essence and of
the origin. Being is together, and it is not a togetherness.
"Together" means simultaneity {in, simul), "at the same time. "
Being together is being at the same time (and in the same place,
Being Singular Plural 61
which is itself the determination of "time" as "contemporary
time"). "Same time/same place" assumes that "subjects," to call
them that, share this space-time, but not in the extrinsic sense of
"sharing"; they must share it between themselves; they must themselves
"symbolize" it as the "same space-time" without which there
would not be time or space. The space-time itself is first of all the
possibility of the "with. " Very long analyses are called for here. Cutting
them far too short, let me say that time cannot be the pure
moment [instant], or pure succession, without being simultaneity
"at the same time. " Tim e itself implies "at the same time. " Simultaneity
immediately opens space as the spacing of time itself. Starti
ng from the simultaneity of "subjects," time is possible, but above
all, it is necessary. For in order to be together and to communicate,
a correlation of places and a. transition of passages from one place
to another is necessary. Sharing [partage] and passage control each
other reciprocally. Husser l writes, "It is essentially necessary that
the togetherness of monads, their mere co-existence, be a temporal
In fact, simultaneity is not a matter of indis- co-existence.
"53
tinction; on the contrary, it is the distinctness of places taken together.
The passage from one place to another needs time [D'un lieu
à l'autre, il faut le temps]. An d moving in place [du lieu à luimême]
as such also needs time: the time for the place to open itself
as place, the time to space itself. Reciprocally, originary time, appearing
as such, needs space [il lui faut l'espace], the space o f its own
dis-tension, the space of the passage that divides [partage] it. Noth -
ing and nobody can be born without being born to and with others
who come into this encounter, who are born in their own turn.
T he "together," therefore, is an absolutely originary structure. Wha t
is not together is in the no-time-no-place of non-Being.
Co-appearance, then, must signify—because this is what is now
at stake—tha t "appearing" (coming into the world and being in
the world, or existence as such) is strictly inseparable, indiscernable
from the cum or the with, which is not only its place and its taking
place, but also—an d this is the same thing—it s fundamental ontological
structure.
That Being is being-with, absolutely, this is what we must think. 5 4 
61 Being Singular Plural
T he with is the most basic feature of Being, the mark [trait] of the
singular plurality of the origin or origins in it.
Undoubtedly, the with as such is not presentable. I have already
said so, but I have to insist upon it. The with is not "unpresentable"
like some remote or withdrawn presence, or like an Other. If there
is a subject only with other subjects, the "with" itself is not a subject.
Th e "with" is or constitutes the mark of unity/disunity, which
in itself does not designate unity or disunity as that fixed substance
which woul d undergird it; the "with" is not the sign of a reality, or
even of an "intersubjective dimension. " It really is, "i n truth, " a
mark drawn out over the void, which crosses over it and underlines
it at the same time, thereby constituting the drawing apart [traction]
and drawing together [tension] of the void. As such, it also
constitutes the traction and tension, repulsion/attraction, of the
"between"-us. Th e "with" stays between us, and we stay between
us: just us, but only [as] the interval between us.
In fact, one should not say the "with" ; one should onl y say
"with, " which woul d be a preposition that has no position of its
o wn and is available for every position. But if the unpresentability
of "with" is not that of a hidden presence, then it is because "with"
is the unpresentability of this pre-position, that is, the unpresentability
of presentation itself. "With " does not add itself to Being,
but rather creates the immanent and intrinsic condition of presentation
in general.
Presence is impossible except as copresence. If I say that the
Uniqu e is present, I have already given it presence as a companion
(even if such presence constitutes the Unique , and I have split it in
two). The co- of copresence is the unpresentable par excellence, but
it is nothing other than—an d not the Othe r of—presentation, the
existence which co-appears.
If we now have to think about social Being in some other way
than according to its spectacular-market self-mockery or its communicational
self-assurance, both of which take place on the basis
of an unlikely and nostalgic inauthenticity, it is quite likely that there
would be nothing else for us to meditate on, nothing to ruminate
about or mull over between us. Wha t is proper to community is neiBeing
Singular Plural 63
ther a creativity nor a rationality laid down like some fundamental
internal resource, readily available to be put into practice through
critique. In this respect, we are definitely no longer in the age of En -
lightenment or Romanticism. We are elsewhere, which does not
mean we are opposed to them or beyond them, as if we had dialectically
surpassed them. We are in a sort of simultaneous drawing together
[tension] of these two epochs; they are contemporaries of ours
and we see them wearing thin. On e is worn thin to the point of being
an extremely dull platitude; the other is stretched out toward the
night of extermination. We are thus in a suspension of history where
an enigma is gathering anew; we are contemporaries of ourselves,
contemporaries of the stripping bare of being-in-common.
Wha t is proper to community, then, is given to us in the followi
ng way: it has no other resource to appropriate except the "with"
that constitutes it, the cum of "community, " its inferiority without
an interior, and maybe even its interior intimo sui. As a result, this
cum is the cum of a co-appearance, wherein we do nothing but appear
together with one another, co-appearing before no other authority
[l'instance]^ than this "with" itself, the meaning of which
seems to us to instantly dissolve into insignificance, into exteriority,
into the inorganic, empirical, and randomly contingent [aléatoire]
inconsistency of the pure and simple "with. "
So it appears to us that what is proper to communit y is nothing
more than the generalized impropriety of banality, of anonymity,
of the lonely crowd and gregarious isolation. The simplest solidarities,
the most elementary proximities seem to be dislocated. As
such, then, "communication" is only the laborious negotiation of a
reasonable and disinterested image of communit y devoted to its
o wn maintenance, which constantly reveals itself as nothing but
the maintenance of the spectacular-market machine.
It must be said, however, that co-appearance might only be another
name for capital. At the same time, it might be a name that
runs the risk of once again masking what is at-issue, providing a
consoling way of thinking that is secretly resigned. But this danger
is not a sufficient reason to be satisfied with a critique of capital
that is still held prisoner to the presupposition of an "other sub-
6 4 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 65
ject" of history, economics, and the appropriation of the proper in
general. In pointing to "capital, " Mar x designated a general depropriation
[dépropriation] that does not allow for the presupposition
or preservation of the other, or the Other, which would be the
subject of the general reappropriation.
Or more precisely, the presupposition cannot take the form of
presupposing a "subject"; rather, it must take the form of beingwith-one-another
, and must do so in a way that is muc h more
problematic, but far more radical, than Mar x could have suspected.
It must also be said, then, that the classic critique of capital, even in
its latest post-Marxis t forms, is not sufficient for taking hold of
what capital exposes. At the very least, a thinking of co-appearance
must awaken this anxiety.
T h e intuition buried in Marx's work i s undoubtedly located in
the following ambivalence: at one and the same time, capital exposes
the general alienation of the proper—whic h is the generalized
disappropriation, or the appropriation of misery in every sense
of the word—and it exposes the stripping bare of the with as a mark
of Being, or as a mark of meaning. Ou r thinking is not yet adequate
to this ambivalence. Thi s is why, since Mar x and up through Heidegger,
such ambivalence constantly revives a great, undefined hesitation
on the subject of "technology," the limit-object—and perhaps
the screen [l'objet-écran]—of a thinking which projects onto
it either the promise of a self-overcoming of capital or the assurance
of the implacable character of its machinery carrying on uncontrolled—and,
thereby, controlling everything thanks to this absence
of control.
Thi s is also why the truth of our time can only be expressed in
Marxis t or post-Marxis t terms. Thi s wh y it is a question of the
market, of misery, of social-democratic ideology, or the substantial
reappropriations that give a reply to it (nationalism, fundamentalism,
and fascism in all their various forms). But this truth
itself demands that it be thought starting from the with of coappearance,
so long as bringing it to life and stripping it bare signifies
at least this—t o put it in a formulaic way: what is at stake is
not a reappropriation of the with (of the essence of a commo n Being),
but rather a with of reappropriation (where the proper does
not return, or returns only with).
(Thi s is why we do not make an economy out of an ontology,
but it is also why this ontology must be both an ethos and a praxis,
identically. Thi s wil l have to be developed later. 5 6
 Let us hold the
following in reserve: an ontology of being-with can only be located
within the distinction of these terms: to be, to act, event, meaning,
end, conduct, just as much as, and because, it must be located
within the distinction of the "singular" and the "plural, " the "i n
oneself" ["à soi"] and the "i n several" ["à plusieurs"].)
The Spectacle of Society
If being-with is the sharing of a simultaneous space-time, then
it involves a presentation of this space-time as such. In order to say
"we," one must present the "here and now" of this "we." Or rather,
saying "we" brings about the presentation of a "here and now,"
however it is determined: as a room, a region, a group of friends,
an association, a "people." We can never simply be "the we," understood
as a unique subject, or understood as an indistinct "we"
that is like a diffuse generality. "We " always expresses a plurality,
expresses "our" being divided and entangled: "one" is not "with" in
some general sort of way, but each time according to determined
modes that are themselves multiple and simultaneous (people, culture,
language, lineage, network, group, couple, band, and so on).
Wha t is presented in this way, each time, is a stage [scene] on which
several [people] can say "I, " each on his own account, each in turn.
But a "we" is not the adding together or juxtaposition of these "Is. "
A "we," even one that is not articulated, is the condition for the
possibility of each "I. " No "I " can designate itself without there being
a space-time of "self-referentiality" in general. Thi s "generality,"
however, does not have a "general" consistency; it only has the consistency
of the singular at "each time" of each "I. " "Each time" im -
plies at one and the same time the discreteness of "one by one" and
the simultaneity of "each one." After all, an "each one" that was not
in any way simultaneous, that was not at-the-same-time-and-along-
6 6 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 6?
side-other "each ones," would be isolated in a way that woul d no
longer even count as isolation. Rather, it woul d be the pure and
simple impossibility of designating oneself and, therefore, of being
a "self." Th e pure condition o f being disttibuted [distributive]
would be transformed immediately into absolute autism. (But this
is not to say that the "group," whatever it is, is of a higher order; it
is a stage [that serves as] a place of identification. Mor e generally,
the question of the "with" can never be expressed in terms of identity,
but rather always in terms of identifications.)
As I have already pointed out, not even Descartes can claim to
be alone and worldless, precisely because he is not alone and worldless.
Rather, his pretense makes it clear that anyone who feigns solitude
thereby attests to the "self-referentiality" of anyone [de quiconque].
Th e ego sum counts as "evident," as a first truth, onl y
because its certainty can be recognized by anyone. So, to articulate
it completely would be to say: / say that we, all of us and each one of
us, say "ego sum, ego existo." On e is not obliged to read Descartes as
Heidegger does, which is as someone who, in staying at the point
of substance or res cogitans, does not go back as far as the absolutely
primordial condition. In fact, one must read Descartes literally, as
he himself invites us to: engaging with hi m and like him in the experience
of the pretense [to solitude]. Onl y this thinkin g with
achieves the status of evidence, which is not a proo f [une démonstration}.
From its very first moment, the methodological pretense
is neither substantialist nor solipsistic: it uncovers the stage of the
"at each time" as our stage, the stage of the "we."
Thi s stage—thi s "theater of the world, " as Descartes also liked
to call it, using the persistent image of his time—i s not a stage in
the sense of an artificial space of mimeti c representation. It is a
stage in the sense of the opening of a space-time for the distribution
of singularities, each of who m singularly plays the unique and
plural role of the "self" or the "being-self." "Self" does not mean
in itself, or by itself, or for itself, but rather "one of us": one that is
each time at a remove from immanence or from the collective, but
is also each time coessendal to the coexistence of each one, of "each
and every one." Th e stage is the space of a co-appearing without
which there would be nothing but Being pure and simple, which
is to say, all and nothing, all as nothing.
Being gives itself as singular plural and, in this way, organizes itself
as its own stage. We present the "I " to ourselves, to one another,
just as "I, " each time, present the "we" to us, to one another.
In this sense, there is no society without spectacle; or more precisely,
there is no society without the spectacle of society. Although
already a popular ethnological claim or, in the Western tradition,
a claim about the theater, this proposition must be understood as
ontologically radical. There is no society without the spectacle because
society is the spectacle of itself.
B ut in a certain sense, this itself must be understood as a play of
mirrors (at least insofar as "play" and "mirror " simply designate artifice
and unreality). As a concept of being-together [être-ensemble],
co-appearance consists in its appearing, that is, in its appearing
to itself and to one another, all at once. There is no appearing
to oneself except as appearing to one another. If this were put in
classical terms, terms that presuppose a sphere of proper and isolated
individuality as the starting point, then it would be rendered
in the following way: one appears to oneself insofar as one is already
an other for oneself. 5 7
 But it is immediately clear that one
could not even begin to be an other for oneself if one had not already
started from the alterity with—o r of the with—other s in
general. Others "i n general" are neither other "mes" (since there is
no "me" and "you" except on the basis of alterity in general), nor
the non-me (for the same reason). Others "i n general" are neither
the Same nor the Other . The y are one-another, or of-one-another,
a primordial plurality that co-appears. Therefore, "appearing," and
appearing to oneself as well as to one another, is not on the order
of appearance, manifestation, phenomena, revealing, or some other
concept of becoming-visible. Thi s is because of what that order in -
evitably entails regarding the invisible origin of such appearance,
and what it entails regarding the relation of appearance to this origin
as either an expression or an illusion, as resemblance or semblance.
5 8
 So co-appearing is not "appearing"; it is not a question of
coming out from a being-in-itself in order to approach others, nor 
6 8 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 6 9
is it a question of coming into the world. It is to be in the simultaneity
of being-with, where there is no "i n itself" that is not already
immediately "with. "
B ut "immediately with" does not refer to an immediacy in the
sense of an absence of exteriority. On the contrary, it is the instantaneous
exteriority of space-time (the instant itself as exteriority:
the simultaneous). An d this is how co-appearance forms a stage
that is not a play of mirrors—o r rather, how the truth of the play
of mirrors must be understood as the truth of the "with. " In this
sense, "society" is "spectacular."
Lookin g at it closely, one wil l find that the various critiques of
"spectacular" alienation are, in the end, grounded on the distinction
between a good spectacle and a bad spectacle—[this is true]
whether they like it or not. Withi n the good spectacle, the social or
communitarian being presents its proper inferiority to itself, its origin
(which is itself invisible), the foundation of its rights, the life
of its body, and the splendor of its fulfillment. (For the Situationists,
then, a certain idea of "art" almost always plays the role of the
good spectacle, and it is no accident that the [bad] "spectacle" for
them is first and foremost the falsification of art.) In the bad spectacle,
the social being imagines [se représente] the exteriority of in -
terests and appetites, of egotistic passions and the false glory of ostentation.
At the most basic level, this Manichean division not only
supposes a distinction between the represented objects, but it also
supposes an opposition within the status of the representation: it
is what is now in interiority (as manifestation, expression of the
proper), now in exteriority (as image, reproduction). As such, the
fact that these are intertwined is ignored: there is no "expression"
that is not [already] given in an "image," no "presentation" not already
[given] in "representation"; there is no "presence" that is not
presence to one another.
It is, of course, well know n that the distinction between these
spectacles is drawn out explicitly by Rousseau, who stipulates that
the best spectacle, and the only one that is necessary, is the spectacle
of the people itself, assembled in order to dance around the tree
they have planted as their own proper symbol. Wha t Rousseau thus
makes clear, even despite himself, 5 9
 is the necessity of the spectacle.
In modernity, society knows itself as that which takes place in
the immanent nonpresence to oneself. Tha t is, it takes place as a
subject, not so much the "subject of representation" as representation
as subject it is presentation-to [la présentation-à], or what one
could call a-presentation [lapprésentation], the realm of comin g
into presence as coming conjoined, coincidental and concurrent,
simultaneous and mutual. Thi s a-presentation is that of a "we" that
possesses neither the nature of a commo n "I " nor that of a geometric
place, in the sense of an ensemble in which all the "I's"
woul d be equidistant from one another. Rather, it is what opens
the spacing of co-appearance on this side of every I-subject. "Association"
["Sociation"] does not disclose itself as a being, but rather
as an act that, by definition, exposes itself: it is in exposing itself
that it is what it is, or that it does what it does. Being-social must
testify before itself to the act of association, the act that brings it to
be—no t in the sense that it produces it (as a result), but rather in
the sense that "Being" remains wholly within the act and in the exposition
of the act. In this sense, one could say that Rousseau's "social
contract" is not in essence the conclusion of an agreement; it
is the stage, the theater for the agreement.
Even if being-social is not immediately "spectacular" in any of the
accepted senses of the word, it is essentially a matter of beingexposed.
It is as being-exposed; that is, it does not follow from the
immanent consistency of a being-in-itself. The being-in-itself of "society"
is the network and cross-referencing [le renvoi mutuel] of coexistence,
that is, o/coexistences. Thi s is why every society gives itself
its spectacle and gives itself as spectacle, in one form or another. 6 0
To this extent, every society knows itself to be constituted in the
nonimmanence of co-appearance, although society does not expose
this as a "knowledge." It exposes what it knows as its own stage and
through its own praxis oistaging [praxis scénographique]; and what 
•jo Being Singular Plural
it knows is that, hidden behind being-together, there is not some
other Being which woul d no longer or not yet be being-together;
that is, what it knows is that there is not togetherness itself hidden
behind being-together—in presence, in person, in body, or in
essence. Therefore, it knows that "togetherness" is not a predicate
of Being and that "togetherness" is the trace of Being itself. In other
words, the togetherness of Being [l'ensemble de l'être] is not a being;
it shares Being.
Thus , the spontaneous knowledge of society—its "preontological
comprehension" of itself—i s knowledge about Being itself, absolutely,
and not about the particular and subordinate region of beings,
which woul d be the "social" region of Being. Being-with is
constitutive of Being, and it is [constitutive] for the totality of beings
(I will return to this below); "social" co-appearance is itself the
exposing of the general co-appearance of beings. Thi s insight makes
its way from Rousseau to Bataille, or from Mar x to Heidegger, and
it requires that we find a language that is ours.
Undoubtedly , we are still stuttering: philosophy always comes
too late, and as a result, also too soon. But the stuttering itself betrays
the form of the problem: we, "we," how are we to say "we"?
Or rather, who is it that says "we," and what are we told about ourselves
in the technological proliferation of the social spectacle and
the social as spectacular, as well as in the proliferation of self-mediatized
globalization and globalized mediatization? We are incapable
of appropriating this proliferation because we do not know
h ow to think this "spectacular" nature, which at best gets reduced
to a discourse about the uncertain signs of the "screen" and of "culture."
The same applies to "technological" nature, which we regard
as an autonomous instrument. We do so without ever asking ourselves
if it might not be "our" comprehension of "our-selves" that
comes up wit h these techniques and invents itself in them, and
without wondering if technology is in fact essentially in complete
agreement with the "with." 6 1
 We are not up to the level of the "we":
we constantly refer ourselves back to a "sociology" that is itself only
the learned form of the "spectacular-market." We have not even begun
to think "ourselves" as "we."
Being Singular Plural 71
Thi s is not to say that such thinkin g can onl y occur to us tomorrow
or at some later point, as if it depended on progress or
some revelation. It may not be a matter of a new object of thinking
that could be identified, defined, and exhibited as such. We do not
have to identify ourselves as "we," as a "we." Rather, we have to disidentify
ourselves from every sort of "we" that would be the subject
of its own representation, and we have to do this insofar as "we" coappear.
Anterior to all thought—and, in fact, the very condition of
thinking—th e "thought" of "us" is not a representational thought
(not an idea, or notion, or concept). It is, instead, a praxis and an
ethos: the staging o f co-appearance, the staging which is co-appearing.
We are always already there at each instant. Thi s is not an in -
novation—bu t the stage must be reinvented; we must reinvent it
each time, each time making our entrance anew.
A major sign of the difficulty we have regarding the spectacle is
indicated by the paradigmatic character that the Athenian theater
has for us. There is certainly nothing accidental in the fact that our
modern way of grounding the so-called Western tradition involves
a triple reference: to philosophy as the shared exercise of logos, to
politics as the opening of the city, and to the theater as the place of
the symbolic-imaginary appropriation of collective existence. Th e
Athenian theater, both the institution itself and its content, appears
to us as the political (civil) presentation of the philosophical (the
self-knowledge of the logical animal) and, reciprocally, as the philosophical
presentation of the political. That is, it appears to us as the
"one" presentation of being-together, yet as a presentation where
the condition for its possibility is the irreducible and institutive distance
[l'écart] of representation. Moreover, this distance defines the
theater, insofar as it is neither political nor philosophical at the same
time—an d neither of these in a rather specific way. Th e Athenian
theater appears to us as the conjunction of logos and mimesis, but
when we see it in this way, we systematically efface the moment of
mimesis in favor of the moment of logos.
We efface it in our imagining [représentant] that there could be 
7^ Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 73
—an d especially that there was, once upon a time— a "good" mimesis
(the sort Plato wanted), a mimesis of logos, and a "bad" mimesis
(that of the "sophist," the prototype of the spectacular merchant
w ho sells the simulacra of logos). But we never pursue this logic to
its end, for doing so would require that we recognize the following:
if there is a necessity to mimesis, then it is because logos does not
present itself of its own accord—an d maybe because it does not
present itself at all, because its logic is not the logic of presence. 6 2
Thi s amounts to recognizing that "social logos," the logic of "association,
" and "association" itself as the logos all require mimesis.
H a s there ever been a logos that was not "social"? Whatever logos
means—whethe r a word or number, a gathering or welcoming in
which Being is manifest, reason that is rendered or constructed—it
always implies sharing, and it always implies itself as sharing.
By effacing the intrinsic moment or dimension of mimesis, we efface
this sharing. We give ourselves the representation of a presence
that is immanent and enclosed, self-constitutive and self-sufficient,
the integrally self-referential order of what we call a "logic" in the
most general and basic sense. In this sense, "logic" represents selfreferentiality
held to its ontological condition, which is the originary—and
, as such, existential—plurality or sharing of logos itself.
Against this good conjunction of the logical and the mimetic, we
now oppose the "bad" one: that where logic remains within its im -
manent order, cold and faceless (which today, for us, is the "logic of
capital"), all the while outwardly producing a mimesis that dissimulates
it according to its inverted simulacrum, the self-consuming
"spectacle." Th e self-referentiality of the "image" stands in opposition
to the self-referentiality of the process or the force, as its product
and truth. As over and against the "Greek" paradigm, this is
the way in which our tradition has for a long time set up the "Ro -
man" paradigm: the site of circus games, burlesque theater, and the
theater of cruelty; without "civil " identification; the Empir e and
the reason for Empir e [raison d'Empire}; the forum emptied of its
meaning. . . .
 6 3
Aeschylus or Nero . . . our referring to things in this way, which
sets the Greek stage in such violent contrast to the Roma n circus
(and which also divides—thi s is a remarkable example—th e
Christian traditions of Protestantism and Catholicism, or divides
the several different forms of the profane theatrical tradition), reveals
a consciousness that is itself conflicted, as is demonstrated by
its unease wit h regard to the spectacle: "good" (re)presentation is
represented as lost; "bad" (re)presentation is represented as both
popular and generalized. But, in fact, both of them are our representations;
they compose the double spectacle that we give to ourselves,
the double spectacle of the double unpresentability of social
Being and its truth. There is one unpresentability because of a certain
retreat, and another unpresentability on account of a certain
vulgarity. Maybe we have to begin by taking some distance from
this double spectacle, by no longer wishing to be Greeks, by no
longer fearing that we are Romans , and by simply understanding
ourselves as moderns, where being modern means the following:
taking note of an exposed "unpresentability" as such, but which is
nothing other than the very presentation of our co-appearing, of
"us" co-appearing, and whose "secret" exposes itself and exposes us
to ourselves without our even beginning to penetrate it—i f it is a
matter of "penetrating" it at all.
The Measure of the "With "
T he bare exposition of co-appearance is the exposition6 4
 of capital.
Capital is something like the reverse side of co-appearance and
that which reveals co-appearance. Capital's violent inhumanity displays
[étale] nothing other than the simultaneity of the singular
(but the singular posing as the indifferent and interchangeable particularity
of the unit of production) and the plural (itself posing as
the system of commodit y circulation). Th e "extortion of surplusvalue"
presupposes this concomitance between the "atomization"
of producers (of "subjects" reduced to being-productive) and a
"reticulation" of profit (not as an equal redistribution, but as a concentration
that is itself more and more complex and delocalized).
O n e could say that capital is the alienation of being singular
plural as such. Thi s would be quite accurate so long as one did not 
74 Being Singular Plural
understand being singular plural as a primitive, authentic subject, a
subject to which capital happened as its other and purely by accident.
(Nothing could be more foreign to Marx's thinking.) Capital
is the "alienation" of Being in its being-social to the extent that it
puts this being in play as such. It is not the negative dialectic of
some prior communit y that occurs within a continuous historical
process; instead, it exposes a singular-plural constitution or configuration
that is neither the "community " nor the "individual. " Incalculable
"surplus-value"—"value" as indefinite, circulatory, and
autotelic growth—exposes the inaccessibility of a primordial or final
"value." In a paradoxical and violent way, it immediately poses the
question of an "outside-value" or "absolute value"—which woul d
be immeasurable, priceless (what Kant called a "dignity"). There is,
then, a certain concomitance between the globalization of the market
and that of "human rights": these rights represent the supposed
absolute value that capital claims to exchange for . . . itself.
However, this is also why there is the stripping bare [mise à nu] of
being-social and, at the same time, its being brought to life [mise à
vif], exactly because the "rights-bearing" "human" is "valuable" in
itself. In fact, he is nothing other than the idea of a "value in itself"
or a "dignity." If "humanity" must be worth something, or if Being
in general must "be worth something" under the heading "humanity,"
this can only be by "being valuable" singularly and, simultaneously,
in "being valuable" by and for and with the plural thai such
singularity implies, just as it implies the fact of the "value" itself.
Indeed, wh o could be [more] valuable for oneself than oneself?
"Being valuable" is worth something only within the context of being-with,
that is, only insofar as it concerns commerce In every sense
of the word. Bu t it is precisely the sharing of these senses—the
commerce of goods/the commerce of being-together—that capital
exposes: the sharing of the senses of exchange, the sharing of the
sharing itself. Capital exposes it as a certain violence, where beingtogether
becomes being-of-market-value [letre-marchand] and haggled
over [marchandé]. Th e being-with that is thus exposed vanishes
at the same time that it is exposed, stripped bare.
To say that this violence exposes being singular plural as an abBeing
Singular Plural 75
solute of existence is not to justify it. For this violence violates what
it exposes. This , however, does not amount to declaring that the "secret"
of capital has been revealed, along with the means of converting
it into its opposite. Instead, the violence of capital gives the measure
of what is exposed, of what comes to "us" to expose itself: singular
plural being-with is the only absolute measure of Being itself, or of
existence. But this is an incommensurable measure if it is equal to
the "at each time" o f each "one" and, at the same time, to the indefinite
plurality of coexistences against which each one is measured m
turn—accordin g to the indefinite commensuration of the coincidences
of commerce, combat, competition, comparison, communication,
concurrence, concupiscence, compassion, co-jouissance. . . .
There is a commo n measure, which is not some one unique
standard applied to everyone and everything. It is the commensurability
of incommensurable singularities, the equality of all the
origins-ofthe-world, which, as origins, are strictly unexchangeable
[insubstituable]. In this sense, they are perfectly unequal, but they
are unexchangeable onl y insofar as they are equally with one another.
Such is the sort of measurement that it is left up to us to take.
"Society" is neither Greek nor Roman—no r Judeo-Christian, to
which we wil l return later. Society knows itself and sees itself as
bared, exposed to this commo n excess [démesure]. At one and the
same time, it sees itself as something quite evident and transparent,
whose necessity eclipses that of every ego sum, and as an opacity
that denies itself every subjective appropriation. At that mo -
ment when we clearly come [to stand] before ourselves, as the lone
addresser(s) facing the lone addressee(s), we cannot truly say "we."
B ut it is through this that we now have to attain to a knowledge
of the "we"—attain to a knowledge and/or a praxis of the "we."
T he "we" is not a subject in the sense of egoistic self-identification
and self-grounding (even if this itself never takes place outside of
a "we"); neither is the "we" "composed" of subjects (the law of such
composition is the aporia of all "intersubjectivity"). However, the
"we" is not nothing; it is "someone" each time, just as "each one" is 
j 6 Being Singular Plural
someone. Moreover, this is why there is no universal "we": on the
one hand, "we" is said each time of some configuration, group, or
network, however small or large; on the other hand, "we" say "we"
for "everyone," for the coexistence of the entire universe of things,
animals, and people that is mute and without "us." "We " neither
says the "One " nor does it say the adding together of "ones" and
"others"; rather, "we" says "one" in a way that is singular plural, one
by one and one with one.
Nothin g can really be thought about this situation unless the
one, in general, is first thought in terms of with-one-another. Yet, it
is here that our ontology fails, since we are "amongst us" ["entre
nous"] and since "Being " comes down to just that—i f I can say it
like this.
(It is as if Being has come back to this "between," which is its
true place, as though it had been a matter of a "forgetting the between"
rather than "forgetting Being. " Or rather, it is as if the invention
of Being, throughout the whol e tradition, were nothing
but the invention of our existence as such—as the existence of us
and as us, us in the world, we-the-world. "We " woul d be, then, the
most remote, absolute priority of every ontology; as a result, "we"
woul d also be the most belated, most difficult, and least appropriable
effect of the ontological demand.)
T he with constitutes a sort of permanent end point of the tradition.
It is a minor category; in fact, even up until today, including
Heidegger in certain regards, it is barely a category at all insofar as
"Being" has been represented as being alone with itself, and as having
no coexistence or coincidence. So, when Husser l declares "the
intrinsically first being, the being that precedes and bears every
worldly Objectivity, is transcendental intersubjectivity: the universe
of monads, which effects its communion in various forms," 6 5
 this
Being constitutes for hi m nothing less than an ultimate horizon,
freed from contingency and the exteriority of coexistents. It corresponds
to a transcendental solidarity rather than an empiricotranscendental
simultaneity. As a result, it again becomes something
like a substratum rather than something open or dis-posed
in itself through its coconstitution. Generally speaking, then, the
Being Singular Plural yj
Being of philosophical ontology cannot have coessence, since it
only has non-Being as its correlate. But what if Being itself is the
coessentiality of existence?
Since being-social appears to us to lie beyond our reach, whether
as communit y (subsumption under the Subject, pure Being without
relations) or as association (accommodation of subjects, relation
without essentiality), it is the category of the "other" that
crosses through much contemporary thinking. It would be necessary
to show how this category, and the obsession [la hantise] that
it ends up constituting for a good portion of our thinking , both
represents the incommensurability of Being as being-with-one-another
and runs the risk of covering over or deferring this Being's
realm, insofar as it is the realm of the with, that is, insofar as it is
the measure of this incommensurability.
T h e other is presented as the alter ego or as the other of the ego,
as the other outside of the self or as the other withi n the self, as
"others" or the "Other" ; all these ways of looking at it, all these aspects,
all these faces, and all of "those who m we cannot look in the
face" ["ces indévisageables"]—whose necessity is, in every case, in -
contestable—always bring us back to the very heart of the matter,
to an alterity or alteration where the "self" is at stake. The other is
thinkable, and must be thought, beginning from that moment
when the self appears and appears to itself as a "self."
Yet, this identification of the self as such—it s subjectivization in
the deepest and richest philosophical sense of the term, the one
that reaches its extreme limit in Hegel—ca n only take place once
the subject finds itself or poses itself originarily as other than itself,
doing so in the infinite presupposition of the self that constitutes
it as a subject and according to the necessary law of such presupposition.
Thi s would be a self that is older and more originary than
itself, a self in itself that is other than the self for itself. Thi s is really
not muc h more than a transcription of Hegel.
Therefore, the self knows itself principall y as other than itself:
such is the constitution of "self-consciousness." An d yet, the logic
of this constitution is paradoxical, since it involves simultaneously
the opening of the self to the other and its closure. In fact, the al-
7 8 Being Singular Plural
terity of the other is such that to recognize it is to be denied access
to it; there can be access onl y on the condition of a radical alteration
or, more precisely, a radical alienation. A dialectic of the same
a nd the other, of the same in the other, of the same as other, undoes
this aporia, but this undoing comes at a price, the price of the
dialectic in general. It reveals that the power of the negative which
holds the self to the other, the dis-alienating and reappropriative
power of alienation itself as the alienation of the same, wil l always
be presupposed as the power of the self, or the Self as this very
power. The Self remains alone in itself even as it emerges out of itself.
Wha t is properly lacking or passed over in this false emergence
is the moment of the with.
Ope n to the other and occurring as other, the self has its originarity
in the loss of self. Birt h and death become the marks of a
point of origin [provenance] and destination within the other: an
origin/destination as a loss, as the memorial mourning of the im -
memorial, and as the reconquering or reappropriation of an inappropriat
e aseity in all its irreducible alterity. Thi s other is not
"with" ; it is no longer and not yet "with" ; it is nearer and further
away than every being-together. It does not accompany identity; it
crosses through it, and transgresses it; it transfixes it. Withi n the
discourse about alterity, a general mode of trans- (transport, transaction,
transcription, transfer, transmission, transformation, transparency,
transubstantiation, transcendence) continually runs alongside
the mode of cum-, but it wil l never be able to eclipse it or
replace it.
In and of itself transcendent, the subject is born into its intimacy
("interior intimo neo"), and its intimacy wanders away from it in
statu nascendi ("interfeces et urinam nascimur"). "To exist" is no
longer "to be" (for itself, in itself), to-already-no-longer-be and tonot-yet-be,
or even to-be-lacking, that is, to-be-in-debt-to-being.
To exist is a matter of going into exile. The fact that the intimate,
the absolutely proper, consists in the absolutely other is what alters
the origin in itself, in a relation to itself that is "originarily plunged
into mourning." 6 6
 Th e other is in an originary relation to death
and in a relation to originary death.
Being Singula r Plu ral 79
In this way, then, "solitude" appears. Thi s is the Christian event,
which does not mean that it was not prepared for well in advance,
or that it was not, in its own way, contemporary to our whole tradition.
Solitude par excellence is solitude of the self insofar as it relates
to itself, outside of itself in extremis and in principis, outside of
the world, ex-isting existence. Consciousness of self is solitude. The
other is this very solitude exposed as such: as a self-consciousness
that is infinitely withdrawn in itself, into itself—i n itself as into
itself.
As such, the coexistent—the other person, but also the other
creature in general—appears as that which is in itself infinitely withdrawn.
It appears inaccessible to "me" because it is withdrawn from
the "self" in general, and because it is as the self-outside-itself: it is
the other in general, the other that has its moment of identity in the
divine Other , which is also the moment of the identity of everything,
of the universal corpus mysticum. The Othe r is the place of
community as communion, that is, the place of a being-self-in-other
[être-soi-en-1'autre] that would no longer be altered or where such alteration
would be identification. In this world, the mystery of communion
announces itself in the form of the nearby [prochaine].
Proximity is the correlate of intimacy: it is the "nearest," the "closest,"
which is also to say "the most approximate" or "infinitely approximate"
to me, but it is not me because it is withdrawn in itself,
into the self in general. Th e proximit y of the nearest is a
minute, intimate distance and, therefore, an infinite distance whose
resolution is in the Other . Th e nearest is that which is utterly removed,
and this is why the relation to it presents itself (1) as an im -
perative, (2) as the imperative of a love, and (3) as a love that is
"like the love of myself." 6 7
 Th e love of self, here, is not egoism in
the sense of preferring oneself over others (which woul d contradict
the commandment); it is an egoism in the sense of privileging oneself,
one's own-self [le soi-propre], as a model, the imitation of which
would provide the love of others. It is necessary to love one's ownself
in the other, but reciprocally, one's own-self in me is the other
of the ego. It is its hidden intimacy.
Thi s is why it is a matter of "love": this love is not some possible 
8o Being Singular Plural
mode of relation; it designates relation itself at the heart of Being—i
n lieu of and in the place of Being 6 8 —an d designates this
relation, of one to another, as the infinite relation of the same to
the same as originarily other than itself. "Love" is the abyss of the
self in itself; it is the "delectation" ["dilection"] or "taking care" of
what originarily escapes or is lacking; it consists in taking care of
this retreat and in this retreat. As a result, this love is "charity": it is
the consideration of the caritas, of the cost or the extreme, absolute,
and, therefore, inestimable value of the other as other, that is, the
other as the self-withdrawn-in-itself. Thi s love speaks of the infinite
cost of what is infinitely withdrawn: the incommensurability
of the other. As a result, the commandment of this love lays out
this incommensurability for what it is: access to the inaccessible.
Yet, it is not sufficient to discredit such love as belonging to some
intemperate idealism or religious hypocrisy. Rather, it is a matter
of deconstructing the Christianity and sentimentality of an imperative
the openly excessive and clearly exorbitant character of which
must be read as a warning to us; I woul d even go so far as to say
that it just is a warning to us. It is a matter of wondering about the
"meaning" (or "desire") of a thinking or culture that gives itself a
foundation the very expression of which denotes impossibility, and
of wondering how and to what extent the "madness" of this love
could expose the incommensurability of the very constitution of
the "self" and the "other," of the "self" in the "other."
Wit h regard to this constitution, then, and at the heart of JudeoChristianity
and its exact opposite, it woul d be a matter of understanding
how the dimension of the with both appears and disappears
all at once. On the one hand, the proximity of what is nearby
[prochain] points to the "nearby" [Taupres" ] of the "with" (the
apud hoc of its etymology). On e could even add that it encircles
this "nearby" and makes it stand out on its own , as a contiguity
and simultaneity of being-near-to as such, without any further determination.
That is, what is "nearby" is no longer the "nearness"
of the family or the tribe, which may be what the primary meaning
o f the Biblical precept refers to; it is not the nearness o f the people
or the philia, or the brotherhood; it is what underlies every logic of
Being Singular Plural 8]
the group or ensemble, every logic of communit y that is based on
nature, blood, source, principle, and origin. 6 9
 Th e measure of such
"nearness" is no longer given, and the "nearby," the "very near" is
exhibited as stripped bare, without measure. As such, everyday
milling around [le côtoiement], the crowd, the mass all become possible—righ
t up until the piling-up of bodies in the anonymous
mass grave or the pulverization of collective ashes. Th e proximit y
of what is nearby, as pure dis-tance, as pure dis-position, can contract
and expand this dis-position to its extreme limit, both at the
same time. In universal being-with-one-another, the in of the in -
commo n is made purely extensive and distributive.
On the other hand, this is why the "nearby" of the with, the simultaneity
of distance and close contact, the most proper constitution
of the cum-, exposes itself as indeterminantness and as a
problem. According to this logic, there is no measure that is proper
to the with, and the other holds it there, within the dialectic o f the
incommensurable and commo n intimacy, or within an alternative
to it. In an extreme paradox, the other turns out to be the other of
the with.
As a result, there are two different measures of the incommensurable
to be found withi n the very depths of our tradition, two
measures that are superimposed, intertwined, and contrasted. On e
is calibrated according to the Other ; the other is calibrated according
to the with. Because the intimate and the proximate, the same
and the other, refer to one another, they designate a "not being
with" and, in this way, a "not being in society." The y designate an
Othe r of the social where the social itself—the commo n as Being
or as a commo n subject—would be in itself, by itself, and for itself:
it woul d be the very sameness of the other and sameness as Other .
In contrast, being-with designates the other that never comes back
to the same, the plurality of origins. The just measure of the with
or, more exactly, the with or being-with as just measure, as justness
and justice, is the measure of dis-position as such: the measure of
the distance from one origin to another. 
Being Singular Plural 8 3 8 2 Being Singular Plural
In his analytic of Mitsein, Heidegger does not do this measure
justice. On the one hand, he deals with the indifference of an "unci
rcumspective tarrying alongside" and, on the other, an "authentic
understanding of others" 7 0—the status of which remains indeterminate
as long as what is in question is anything other than the
negative understanding of the inappropriability of the death of others
or the codestination of a people. Between this indifference and
this understanding, the theme of existential "distantiality" 7 1
 imme -
diately reverts back to competition and domination, in order to
open onto the indistinc t domination of the "one" ["Das Man"].
T he "one" is produced as nothing other than that conversion which
levels out the general attempt by everyone to outdistance everyone
else, which ends in the domination of mediocrity, of the commo n
and average measure, commo n as average. It ends with the "common-mediocre"
concealing the essential "common-with. " But, as
such, it remains to be said just how being-with is essential, seeing
as it codetermines the essence of existence.
Heidegger himself writes that: .. . as Being-with, Dasein "is" essentially
for the sake of [umwillen] Others. .. . In being-with, as
the existential "for-the-sake-of " of Others, these have already been
disclosed [erschlossen] in their Dasein."72 The with, therefore, designates
being-with-regard-to-one-another, such that each one is
"disclosed" ["ouvert"] 7 3
 then and there, that is, constituted as existing:
being the there, that is, the disclosure of Being, being an
"each time " of this disclosure, in such a way that no disclosure
woul d take place (no Being) if the one "disclosed" di d not disclose
itself with regard to an other "disclosed." Disclosure itself consists
only in the coincidence of disclosures. To-be-the-there is not to disclose
a place to Being as Other : it is to disclose/be disclosed to/
through the plurality of singular disclosures.
Since it is neither "love," nor even "relation" in general, nor the
juxta-position of in-differences, the "with" is the proper realm of the
plurality of origins insofar as they originate, not from one another or
for one another, but in view of one another or with regard to one another.
A n origin is not an origin for itself; nor is it an origin in order
to retain itself in itself (that woul d be the origin of nothing); nor
is it an origin in order to hover over some derivative succession in
which its being as origin woul d be lost. An origin is something
other than a starting point; it is both a principle and an appearing;
as such, it repeats itself at each moment of what it originates. It is
"continual creation."
If the world does not "have" an origin "outside of itself," if the
worl d is its ow n origin or the origin "itself," then the origin of the
worl d occurs at each moment o f the world. It is the each time o f
Being, and its realm is the being-with of each time wit h every
[other] time. Th e origin is for and by way of the singular plural of
every possible origin. The "with" is the measure of an origin-of-theworld
as such, or even of an origin-of-meaning as such. To-be-with
is to make sense mutually, and onl y mutually. Meanin g is the
fullest measure of the incommensurable "with. " Th e "with" is the
fullest measure of (the) incommensurable meaning (of Being).
Body, Language
T he plurality of origins essentially disseminates the Origi n of the
world. Th e world springs forth 7 4
 everywhere and in each instant,
simultaneously. Thi s is how it comes to appear out of nothing and
"is created." From now on, however, this being created must be understood
differently: it is not an effect of some particular operation
of production; instead, it is, insofar as it is, as created, as having
arisen, come, or grown (cresco, creo); it has always already sprung
from all sides, or more exactly, it is itself the springing forth and
the coming of the "always already" and the "everywhere." As such,
each being belongs to the (authentic) origin, each is originary (the
springing forth of the springing forth itself), and each is original
(incomparable, underivable). Nevertheless, all of them share originariry
and originality; this sharing is itself the origin.
Wha t is shared is nothing like a unique substance in which each
being would participate; what is shared is also what shares, what is
structurally constituted by sharing, and what we call "matter." The
ontology of being-with can only be "materialist," in the sense that
"matter" does not designate a substance or a subject (or an antisub-
8 4
Being Singular Plural
ject), but literally designates what is divided of itself, what is only as
distinct from itself, partes extra partes, originarily impenetrable to the
combining and sublimating penetration of a "spirit" [or "mind"],
understood as a dimensionless, indivisible point beyond the world.
T he ontology of being-with is an ontology of bodies, of every body,
whether they be inanimate, animate, sentient, speaking, thinking ,
having weight, and so on. Above all else, "body" really means what
is outside, insofar as it is outside, next to, against, nearby, with a(n)
(other) body, from body to body, in the dis-position. No t only does
a body go from one "self" to an "other," it is as itself'from the very
first; it goes from itself to itself; whether made of stone, wood, plastic,
or flesh, a body is the sharing of and the departure from self, the
departure toward self, the nearby-to-self without which the "self"
would not even be "on its own" ["à part soi"] P
Language is the incorporeal (as the Stoics said). Either as an audible
voice or a visible mark, saying is corporeal, but what is said
is incorporeal; it is everything that is incorporeal about the world.
Language is not in the worl d or inside the world , as though the
world were its body: it is the outside of the world in the world. It is
the whole of the outside of the world; it is not the eruption of an
Other , whic h woul d clear away or sublimate the world, which
would transcribe it into something else; instead, it is the exposition
of the world-of-bodies as such, that is, as originarily singular plural.
T he incorporeal exposes bodies according to their being-with-oneanother;
they are neither isolated nor mixed together. The y are
amongst themselves [entre eux], as origins. Th e relation of singular
origins among themselves, then, is the relation of meaning. (That
relation in which one unique Origi n would be related to everything
else as having been originated woul d be a relation of saturated
meaning: not really a relation, then, but a pure consistency; not really
a meaning, but its sealing off, the annulment of meaning and
the end of the origin.)
Language is the exposing of plural singularity. In it, the all of being
is exposed as its meaning, which is to say, as the originary sharing
according to which a being relates to a being, the circulation of
a meaning of the world that has no beginning or end. Thi s is the
Being Singular Plural 85
meaning of the world as being-with, the simultaneity of all presences
that are with regard to one another, where no one is for oneself
without being for others. Thi s is also why the essential dialogue
or polylogue of language is both the one in which we speak to one
another and, identically, the one in which I speak to "myself," being
an entire "society" onto myself—being , in fact, in and as language,
always simultaneously "us" and "me" and "me" as "us," as well as "us"
as "me" For I woul d say nothing about myself if I were not with
myself as I am with numerous others, if this with were not "in " me,
right at me, at the same time as "me," and, more precisely, as the
at-the-same-time according to which, solely, I am.
At this exact point, then, one becomes most aware of the essence
of singularity: it is not individuality; it is, each time, the punctuality
of a "with" that establishes a certain origin of meaning and
connects it to an infinity of other possible origins. Therefore, it is,
at one and the same time, infra-/intraindividual and transindividual,
and always the two together. Th e individual is an intersection
of singularities, the discrete exposition of their simultaneity, an exposition
that is both discrete and transitory.
Thi s is why there is no ultimate language, but instead languages,
words, voices, an originarily singular sharing of voices without
which there would be no voice. In the incorporeal exposition of languages,
all beings pass through humanity. 7 6
 But this exposition exposes
humanit y itself to what is outside the human, to the meaning
of the world, to the meaning of Being as the being-meaning of
the world. Withi n language, "humanity" is not the subject of the
world; it does not represent the world; it is not its origin or end. It
is not its meaning; it does not give it meaning. It is the exponent,
but what it thus exposes is not itself, is not "humanity" ; rather, it
exposes the world and its proper being-with-all-beings in the world,
exposes it as the world. Moreover, this is why it is also what is exposed
by meaning; exposed as "gifted" with language, humanit y is,
above all, essentially ex-posed in its Being. It is ex-posed to and as
this incorporeal outside of the worl d that is at the heart of the
world, that which makes the world "hold" or "consist" in its proper
singular plurality. 
86 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 87
It is not enough to say that the "rose grows without reason." For
if the rose were alone, its growth without reason woul d enclose
withi n itself, by itself, all the reason of the world. But the rose
grows without reason because it grows along with the reseda, the
eglantine, and the thistle—as well as with crystals, seahorses, humans,
and their inventions. An d the whole of being, nature, and
history do not constitute an ensemble the totality of which would
or woul d not be without reason. The whole of being is its own reason;
it has no other reason, which does not mean that it itself is its
o wn principle and end, exactly because it is not "itself." It wits own
dis-position in the plurality of singularities. Thi s Being ex-poses
itself, then, as the between and the with of singulars. Being between,
and with say the same thing; they say exactly what can only be said
(which is called the "ineffable" elsewhere), what cannot be presented
as a being among [parmi] others, since it is the "among" of
all beings {among: inside, in the middl e of, with), which are each
and every time among one another. Being says nothing else; as a result,
if saying always says Being in one way or another, then Being
is exposed only in the incorporeality of the saying.
Thi s does not signify that Being "is only a word, " but rather that
Being is all that is and all that goes into making a word: being-with
in every regard. For a word is what it is only among all words, and
a spoken word is what it is only in the "with" of all speaking. Language
is essentially in the with. Every spoken word is the simultaneity
of at least two different modes of that spoken word; even
when I am by myself, there is the one that is said and" the one that
is heard, that is, the one that is resaid. As soon as a word is spoken,
it is resaid. As such, meaning does not consist in the transmission
from a speaker to a receiver, but in the simultaneity of (at least) two
origins of meaning: that of the saying and that of its resaying.
As far as meaning is concerned, what I say is not simply "said,"
for meaning must return to me resaid in order to be said. But in
returning to me in this way, that is, from the other, what comes
back also becomes another origin of meaning. Meaning is the passi
ng back and forth [passage] and sharing of the origin at the origin,
singular plural. Meaning is the exhibition of the foundation without
foundation, which is not an abyss but simply the with of things
that are, insofar as they are. Logos is dialogue, but the end [or pur -
pose] of dialogue is not to overcome itself in "consensus"; its reason
is to offer, and only to offer (giving it tone and intensity), the
cum-, the with of meaning, the plurality of its springing forth.
It is not enough, then, to set idle chatter in opposition to the authenticity
of the spoken word, understood as being replete wit h
meaning. On the contrary, it is necessary to discern the conversation
(and sustaining) of being-with as such within chatter: it is in
"conversing," in the sense of discussion, that being-with "sustains
itself," in the sense of the perseverance in Being. Speaking-with exposes
the conatus of being-with, or better, it exposes being-with as
conatus, exposes it as the effort and desire to maintain oneself as
"with" and, as a consequence, to maintain something which, in itself,
is not a stable and permanent substance, but rather a sharing
and a crossing through. In this conversation (and sustaining) of being-with,
one must discern how language, at each moment, with
each signification, from the highest to the lowest—right down to
those "phantic," insignificant remarks ("hello," "hi, " "good" . . . )
which only sustain the conversation itself—exposes the with, exposes
itself as the with, inscribes and ex-scribes itself in the with until
it is exhausted, emptied of signification.
"Emptie d of signification": that is, returning all signification to
the circulation of meaning, into the carrying over [transport] that is
not a "translation" in the sense of the conservation of one signification
(however modified), but "trans-lation" in the sense of a
stretching or spreading out [tension] from one origin-of-meaning
to another. Thi s is why this always imminent exhaustion of signification—always
imminent and always immanent to meaning itself,
its truth—goes in two directions: that of commo n chatter and that
of absolute poetic distinction. It is exhausted through the inexhaustible
exchangeability of "phantic" insignificance, or exhausted
by the pure "apophantic" significance, declaration, or manifestation
("apophansis") of this very thing as an unexchangeable spoken
word, unalterable as this very thing, but there as the thing as such.
Fro m one to the other, it is the same conatus: the "with" according 
8 8 Being Singular Plural
to which we expose ourselves to one another, as "ones" and as "others,"
exposing the world as world.
Language constitutes itself and articulates itself from out of the
"as." No matter what is said, to say is to present the "as" of whatever
is said. Fro m the point of view of signification, it is to present
one thing as another thing (for example, its essence, principle, origin,
or its end, its value, its signification), but from the point of
view of meaning and truth; it is to present the "as" as such. Tha t is,
it is to present the exteriority of the thing, its being-before, its being-with-all-things
(and not its being-within or being-elsewhere).
Mallarmé's phrase "I say a flower' ... " expresses [the fact] that
the word says "the flower" as "flower" and as nothing else, a
"flower" that is "absent from all bouquets" only because its "as" is
also the presence as such of every flower in every bouquet. Giorgio
Agamben writes, "The thinking that tries to grasp being as beings
retreats toward the entity without adding to it any further determination
. . . comprehending it in its being-such, in the midst of
its as, it grasps its pure non-latency, its pure exteriority. It no longer
says some thing as some thing but brings to speech this as itself." 7
Every spoken word brings to speech this "as itself," that is, the mu -
tual exposition and disposition of the singularities of the world (of
a world of singularities, of singular worlds, of world-singularities).
Language is the element of the with as such: it is the space of its declaration.
In turn, this declaration as such refers to everyone and to
no one, refers to the world and to its coexistence.
Although he was certainly not the first to do so, La Bruyere put
it in the following way: "Everything is said, and one comes to it
too late. ... " Certainly, everything is said, for everything has always
already been said; yet, everything remains to be said, for the
whole as such is always to be said anew. Death presents the interruption
of a saying of the whole and of a totality of saying: it presents
the fact that the saying-of-everything is at each time an
"everything is said," a discrete and transitory completeness. Thi s is
w hy death does not take place "for the subject," but onl y for its
Being Singular Plural 89
representation. But this is also why "my death" is not swallowed up
with "me" in pure disappearance. As Heidegger says, insofar as it
is the utmost possibility of existence, it exposes existence as such.
Death takes place essentially as language; reciprocally, language always
says death: it always says the interruption of meaning as its
truth. Death as such, [like] birth as such, takes place as language: it
takes place in and through being-with-one-another. Death is the
very signature of the "with" : the dead are those who are no longer
"with" and are, at the same time, those who take their places according
to an exact measure, the appropriate measure, of the in -
commensurable "with. " Death is the "as" without quality, without
complement: it is the incorporeal as such and, therefore, the exposition
of the body. On e is born; one dies—no t as this one or that
one, but as an absolute "as such, " that is, as an origin of meaning
that is both absolute and, as is necessary, absolutely cut off (and
consequently, immortal).
It follows that one is never born alone, and one never dies alone;
or rather, it follows that the solitude of birth/death, this solitude
which is no longer even solitude, is the exact reverse of its sharing.
If it is true, as Heidegger says, that I cannot die in place of the
other, then it is also true, and true in the same way, that the other
dies insofar as the other is with me and that we are born and die
to one another, exposing ourselves to one another and, each time,
exposing the inexposable singularity of the origin. We say in French
"mouri r à" ["dead to"]—t o the world, to life—a s well as "naître à"
["born to"]. Death is to life, which is something other than being
the negativity through which life woul d pass in order to be resuscitated.
To put it very precisely: death as fertile negativity is that of
a single subject (either individua l or generic). Death to life, exposition
as such (the ex-posed as ex-posed = that which turns toward
the world, in the world, the very nihil of its creation) can only
be being-with, singular plural.
In this sense, language is exactly what Bataille calls "the practice
of joy before death." Language is not a diversion, not an arrangement
with the intolerability of death. In one sense, it is the tragic
itself. But it is joy as the destitution of meaning, which lays bare the 
90 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 9 i
origin: the singular plural as such. It is the with as such, which is
also to say the being-such as such: perfectly and simply—an d im -
mortally—equa l to itself and to every other, equal to itself because
and as it is equal to every other; it is, therefore, essentially with
every other equally. As is often said, this is a "commo n fate": we
have nothing in common except our telling ourselves so (and I have
nothing in common with myself except in telling myself so); we exchange,
and we do not exchange; we un-exchange [in-échangons]
this extreme limit of the saying in every spoken word, as speaking
itself. Language exposes death: it neither denies it nor affirms it; it
brings it to language, and death is nothing but that, that which is
essentially brought to language—and that which brings it there.
"Death speaks in me. My speech is a warning that at this very
moment death is loose in the world, that it has suddenly appeared
between me, as I speak, and the being I address: it is there between
us at the distance that separates us, but this distance is also what
prevents us from being separated, because it contains the condition
for all understanding." 7 8
 As such, then, "literature" is language
stretched out [en tension] toward birth and death, exactly because it
is, and insofar as it is, striving toward address, understanding [entente],
and conversation. An d it is stretched like this since it occurs
as recitation, discourse, or singing. (Each of these, in turn, forms
the dis-position of language itself, language's exteriority to/in itself;
each forms language's sharing, not only the sharing of languages,
but that of voices, genres, or tones; it is a multiple sharing without
which there woul d be no "as" in general.) "Literature" means the
being-in-common of what has no commo n origin, but is originarily
in-common or with.
If, as Heidegger says, this is why the relation to one's own death
consists in "taking over from [one]self [one's] ownmost Being, " this
taking over does not imply, contrary to what Heidegger himself
says, that "all Being-with Others , wil l fail us when our ownmos t
potentiality-for-Being is the issue." 7 9
 If being-with is indeed coessential
to Being tout court, or rather is to Being itself, this ownmost
possibility is coessentially a possibility of the with and as the
with. My death is one "ownmost " co-possibility of the other exisfences'
own possibility. It is, or it "will be," my death that says "he
is dead" in their speaking; in this way, my death is not, it wil l not
be, anywhere else. It is "my" possibility insofar as it withdraws the
possibility of the "mine " into itself: that is to say, insofar as this
"mineness" is returned to the singular plural of the always-othermineness.
In "he is dead," it is indeed Being that is in question —
and as being-with.
"Death, " therefore, is not negativity, and language does not
know or practice negativity (or logic). Negativity is the operation
that wants to depose Being in order to make it be: the sacrifice, the
absent object of desire, the eclipse of consciousness, alienation —
and, as a result, it is never death or birth, but only the assumption
of an infinite supposition. As such, then, Being is infinitely presupposed
by itself, and its process is the reappropriation of this presupposition,
always on this side of itself and always beyond itself; it
is negativity at work. But things work out completely differently if
Being is singular plural dis-position. The distancing of disposition
is nothing; this "nothing, " however, is not the negative of anything.
It is the incorporeal by which, according to which, bodies are with
one another, close to one another, side by side, in contact and
(therefore) distanced from one another. Thi s nothing is the res ipsa,
the thing itself: the thing as being-itself, that is, the being-such of
every being, the mutual exposition of beings that exist only in and
through this exposition. Such is a demonstrative; being-such is the
demonstrative essence of Being, the being who shows itself to another
being and in the midst of beings.
Moreover , whether they are aware of it or not, all the different
ways of thinking negativity lead to the same point (they at least
pass through it, even if they refuse to stop there). It is that point
where the negative itself, in order to be the negative (in order to
be the nihil negativum and not just the nihil privatum) must avoid
its own operation and be affirmed in itself, with no remainder; or
else, on the contrary, it must be affirmed as the absolute remainder
that cannot be captured in a concatenation of procedure or operation.
(It is the critical, suspended, inoperative point at the heart
of the dialectic). Self-presupposition interrupts itself; there is a syn-
9 2 Being Singular Plural
copation in the process and in its thinking , a syncopation and in -
stant conversion of supposition into dis-position. Dis-position is
the same thing as supposition: in one sense, it is absolute antecedence,
where the "with" is always already given; in another
sense, it does not "underlie" or preexist the different positions; it is
their simultaneity.
T h e non-Being of Being, its meaning, is its dis-position. The nihil
negativum is the quidpositivum as singular plural, where no
quid, no being, is posed without with. It is without (at a distance)
precisely to the extent that it is with, it is shown and demonstrated
in being-with, [which is] the evidence of existence.
In addition, evil is only ever [found] in an operation that fulfills
the with. On e can fulfill the with either by filling it up or by emptying
it out; it can be given a foundation of plenitude and continuity
or an abyss of intransitivity. In the first case, the singular becomes
a particular withi n a totality, where it is no longer either
singular or plural; in the second case, the singular exists only on its
o wn and, therefore, as a totality—and there too it is neither singular
nor plural. In either case, murder is on the horizon, that is,
death as the operative negativity of the One , death as the work of
the One-Al l or the One-Me . Thi s is exactly why death is [actually]
the opposite of murder: it is the inoperative, but existing, "with"
(such that murder inevitably lacks death).
T h e "with" is neither a foundation nor is it without foundation.
It is nothing except for being-with, the incorporeal with of the being-body
as such. Before being spoken, before being a particular
language or signification, before being verbal, "language" is the following:
the extension and simultaneity of the "with" insofar as it is
the ownmostpower of a body, the propriety of its touching another
body (or of touching itself), which is nothing other than its definition
as body. It finishes itself there, where it is-with; that is, it
comes to a stop and accomplishes itself in a single gesture.
In this sense, "to speak with" is not so much speaking to oneself
or to one another, nor is it "saying" (declaring, naming), nor is it
proffering (bringing forth meaning or bringing meaning to light).
Rather, "to speak with" is the conversation (and sustaining) and
Being Singular Plural 93
conatus of a being-exposed, which exposes only the secret of its own
exposition. Saying "to speak with" is like saying "to sleep with, " "to
go out with" (co-ire), or "to live with" : it is a (eu)phemism for (not)
saying nothing less than what "wanting to say" means [le "vouloir -
dire" veut dire] in many different ways; that is to say, it says Being
itself as communication and thinking : the co-agitatio of Being.
"Language" is not an instrument of communication, and commu -
nication is not an instrument of Being; communication is Being,
and Being is, as a consequence, nothing but the incorporeal by
which bodies express themselves to one another as such.
Coexistential Analytic
T h e existential analytic of Being and Time is the project from
which all subsequent thinking follows, whether this is Heidegger's
o wn latter thinking or our various ways of thinking against or beyond
Heidegger himself. Thi s affirmation 8 0
 is in no way an admission
of "Heideggerianism"; it completely escapes the impoverished
proclamations of "schools." It does not signify that this analytic is
definitive, only that it is responsible for registering the seismic
tremor of a more decisive rupture in the constitution or consideration
of meaning (analogous, for example, to those of the "cogito" or
"Critique"). Thi s is why the existential analytic is not complete,
and why we continue to feel its shock waves.
T he analytic of Mitsein that appears within the existential analytic
remains nothing more than a sketch; that is, even though Mitsein
is coessential with Dasein, it remains in a subordinate position.
As such, the whole existential analytic still harbors some principle
by which what it opens up is immediately closed off. It is necessary,
then, to forcibly reopen a passage somewhere beyond that obstruction
which decided the terms of being-with's fulfillment, and
its withdrawal, by replacing it with the "people" and their "destiny.
" Thi s is not a matter of saying that it is necessary "to com -
plete" the merely sketched-out analysis of Mitsein, nor is it a matter
of setting up Mitsein as a "principle" like it deserves. "In principle, "
being-with escapes completion and always evades occupying the 
T
94 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 95
place of a principle. Wha t is necessary is that we retrace the outline
of its analysis and push it to the point where it becomes apparent
that the coessentiality of being-with is nothing less than a
matter of the co-originarity of meaning—an d that the "meaning
of Being" is only what it is (either "meaning" or, primarily, its own
"precomprehension" as the constitution of existence) when it is
given as with.
There is no "meaning" except by virtue of a "self," of some form
or another. (The subjective formula of the ideality of meaning says
that "meaning" takes place for and through a "self") But there is
no "self" except by virtue of a "with, " which, in fact, structures it.
Thi s would have to be the axiom of any analytic that is to be called
coexistential.
"Self " is not the relation of a "me" to "itself." 8 1
 "Self" is more
originary than "me" and "you. " "Self" is primaril y nothing other
than the "as such" of Being in general. Being is only its own "as Being.
" Th e "as" does not happen to Being; it does not add itself to
Being; it does not intensify Being: it is Being, constitutively. Therefore,
Being is directly and immediately mediated by itself; it is itself
mediation; it is mediation without any instrument, and it is
nondialectic: dia-lectic without dialectic. It is negativity without
use, the nothing of the with and the nothing as the with. The with
as with is nothing but the exposition of Being-as-such, each time
singularly such and, therefore, always plurally such.
Prior to "me" and "you, " the "self" is like a "we" that is neither a
collective subject nor "intersubjectivity," but rather the immediate
mediation of Being in "(it)self," the plural fold of the origin.
(Is mediation itself the "with"? Certainly, it is. Th e "with" is the
permutation of what remains in its place, each one and each time.
T h e "with" is the permutation without an Other . An Othe r is always
the Mediator ; its prototype is Christ. Here, on the contrary, it
is a matter of mediation without a mediator, that is, without the
"power of the negative" and its remarkable power to retain within
itself its ow n contradiction, which always defines and fills in
[plombe] the subject. Mediation without a mediator mediates nothing:
it is the mid-point [mi-lieu], the place of sharing and crossing
through [ passage] ; that is, it is place tout court and absolutely. No t
Christ, but only such a mid-point; and this itself would no longer
even be the cross, but only the coming across [I'croisement] and the
passing though, the intersection and the dispersal [lecartement],82
radiating out [étoilment] from within the very di-mension of the
world. Thi s would be both the summit and the abyss of a deconstruction
of Christianity: the dis-location of the West.)
"Self" defines the element in which "me" and "you, " and "we,"
and "they," can take place. "Self" determines the "as" of Being: if it
is, it is as [en tant que] it is. It is "in itself" prior to any "ego," prior
to any presentable "property." It is the "as" of all that is. Thi s is not
a presentable property, since it is presentation itself. Presentation is
neither a propriety nor a state, but rather an event, the coming of
something: of its coming into the world where the "world" itself is
the plane [la géométral] or the exposing of every coming.
In its coming , that which exists appropriates itself; that is, it is
not appropriated, neither by nor into a "self" (which could onl y
preexist what exists by removing and neutralizing the coming in itself).
Wha t is born has its "self" before self: it has it there (which is
the meaning of Heidegger's "Dasein"). There means over-there, the
distance of space-time (it is the body, the world of bodies, the bodyworld).
Its appropriation is its moving [transport] and being-moved
through [transpropriation] this dispersal of the there; such is the appropriating-event
("Ereignis"). But its being determined as such
does not signify that there is some event in which the "proper self"
would spring forth, like a jack-in-the-box, but that the coming is
in itself and by itself appropriative as such. (As a result, differencing
[différant] is in itself the propriety that it opens.) Thi s is why "self"
does not preexist (itself). "Self" equals what ex-ists as such.
Thus , insofar as "self," or "ipseity," means "by itself," relation to
itself, returning into itself, presence to itself as presence to the
"same" (to the sameness of the "as such"), ipseity occurs or happens
to itself as coming; and such coming is anticipation, which is neither
préexistence nor providence, but instead the unexpected arrival
[sur-venance], the surprise and the being-placed back [remise] into
the "to come" as such, back into what is to come. "Self" is neither a 
9 6 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 9 7
past given nor a future given; it is the present of the coming , the
presenting present, the coming-to-be and, in this way, coming into
Being. But there where it comes is not "into itself," as though into
the interior of an determined domain; it is "beside itself." 8 3
 Beside
itself 'means into the dispersal of the dis-position, into the general
element of proximity and distance, where such proximity and distance
are measured against nothing, since there is nothing that is
given as a fixed point of ipseity (before, after, outside the world).
Therefore, they are measured according to the dis-position itself.
From the very start, the structure of the "Self," even considered as
a kin d of unique and solitary "self," is the structure of the "with. "
Solipsism, if one wants to use this category, is singular plural. Each
one is beside-himself insofar as and because he is beside-others.
From the very beginning, then, "we" are with one another, not as
points gathered together, or as a togetherness that is divided up, but
as a being-with-one-another. Being-with is exactly this: that Being,
or rather that to be neither gathers itself as a resultant commune of
beings nor shares itself out as their commo n substance. To be is
nothing that is in-common, but nothing as the dispersal where what
is in-commo n is dis-posed and measured, the in-commo n as the
with, the beside-itself of to be as such, to be transfixed by its own
transitivity: to be being all beings, not as their individua l and/or
commo n "self," but as the proximity that disperses [écarte] them.
Beings touch; they are in con-tact with one another; they arrange
themselves and distinguish themselves in this way. An y being that
one might like to imagine as not distinguished, not dis-posed,
would really be indeterminate and unavailable: an absolute vacancy
of Being. Thi s is why the ontological moment or the very order of
ontology is necessary. "To be" is not the noun of consistency; it is the
verb of dis-position. Nothing consists, neither "matter" nor "subject."
In fact, "matter" and "subject" are nothing but two names that are
correlates of one another; in their mode of consistency, they indicate
the originary spacing of the general ontological dis-position.
As such, then, "being-there" {Dasein) is to ^accordin g to this
transitive verbal value of the dis-position. Being-there is [the] disposing
[of] Being itself as distance/proximity; it is "to make" or "to
let" be the coming of all with all as such. Dasein (that is, humanit y
as the index of Being) thus exposes Being-as-to-be.
Someone enters a room; before being the eventual subject of a
representation of this room, he disposes himself in it and to it. In
crossing through it, living in it, visiting it, and so forth, he thereby
exposes the disposition—th e correlation, combination, contact,
distance, relation—o f all that is (in) the room and, therefore, of
the room itself. He exposes the simultaneity in which he himself
participates at that instant, the simultaneity in which he exposes
himself just as much as he exposes it and as much as he is exposed
in it. He exposes himself. It is in this way that he is [a] "self," that
he is it, or that he becomes it as many times as he enters into the
disposition and each time that he does. Thi s "at each time" is not
the renewal of the experiences or occurrences of one self-same subject:
so long as "I " am "the same," there wil l still always need to be
an otherùme where I dis-pose myself according to this "sameness."
This , in turn, implies that another time in general—that is, other
times, indefinitely—are not only possible, they are real: the "each"
of the "each time, " the taking place of the there and as there, does
not involve primarily the succession of the identical; it involves the
simultaneity of the different. Even when I am alone, the room is at
the same time the room where I am close to, next to, alongside of
all its other dispositions (the way it is occupied, how it is passedthrough,
and so on). On e is not in the disposition without being
with the other-disposition, which is the very essence of dis-position.
These "times" are discontinuous , but they are their beingwith-one-another
in this discontinuity. "Each time" is the singularplural
structure of the disposition. Therefore, "each time mine "
signifies primarily "each time his or hers," that is, "each time with":
"mineness" is itself only a possibility that occurs in the concurrent reality
of being-each-time-with.
T h e world, however, is not a room into which one enters. It is
also impossible to start from the fiction of someone who is alone
and finds him - or herself in the world: in both cases, the very concept
of the world is destroyed. Thi s concept is that of being-with
as originary. Tha t is, if the meaning (of Being) is dis-position as 
9 8 Being Singular Plural Being Singular Plural 99
such, then this is being-with as meaning: the structure of with is
the structure of the there. Being-with is not added on to beingthere;
instead, to be there is to be with , and to be wit h makes
sense—by itself, with nothing more, with no subsumption of this
meaning under any other truth than that of the with.
In being-with and as being-with, we have always already begun
to understand meaning, to understand ourselves and the world as
meaning. An d this understanding is always already completed, full,
whole, and infinite. We understand ourselves infinitely—ourselves
and the world—an d nothing else.
"With " is neither mediate nor immediate. Th e meaning that we
understand, insofar as we understand it, is not the produc t of a
negation of Being, a negation destined to represent itself to us as
meaning, nor is it the pure and simple ecstatic affirmation of its
presence. "With " neither goes from the same to the other, nor from
the same to the same, nor from the other to the other. In a certain
sense, the "with" does not "go" anywhere; it does not constitute a
process. But it is the closeness, the brushing up against or the comi
ng across, the almost-there [l'à-peu-pres] of distanced proximity.
Whe n we try to evaluate this closeness (as if in a marketplace or
railway station, or in a cemetery, we were to ask what are the meanings
and values of these hundreds of people, of their restlessness
and passivity), it comes out as frantic or distraught. But the meani
ng of the "with, " or the "with" of meaning, can be evaluated only
in and by the "with" itself, an experience from which—i n its plural
singularity—nothing can be taken away.
In understanding ourselves, we understand that there is nothing
to understand; more precisely, this means that there is no appropriation
of meaning, because "meaning" is the sharing of Being.
There is no appropriation; therefore, there is no meaning. Thi s is
itself our understanding. Thi s is not a dialectical operation (according
to which "to understand nothing" would be "to understand
everything"), nor is it a matter of turning it into the abyss (to understand
the nothing of this same understanding), nor is it a re